Skip to content

  * [Journals](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journals)
  * [Books](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/bookbshsrw)

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

  * [Shopping cart](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74 "Shopping cart" )
  * __ Sign in
  * [ Help ](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=browse_open_doc.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fbrowse_open_doc.htm|SkinName=svs_SD "Help \(Opens new window\)" )

[ScienceDirect](/)

  * Sign in

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

    * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
    * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

  * [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

* Sign in
* [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

close

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

  * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
  * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

[ __Order Document
](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=DocumentDeliveryURL&_method=deliver&_orig=article&_rdoc=1&_eid=1-s2.0-S0169515097000042&_cid=271138&_issn=01695150&_pii=S0169515097000042&_zone=toolbar&md5=1986c52b30844d372dbcec957dd4d98c
"Order Document" )

Loading...

__ Export __

You have selected 1 citation for export.

[Help](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=art_export.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fart_export.htm|SkinName=svs_SD
"Help \(Opens new window\)" )

### Direct export

Save to Mendeley

[Save to RefWorks](/sdfe/export/S0169515097000042/refworks-tagged-format)

### Export file

#### Format

RIS (for EndNote, ReferenceManager, ProCite)

BibTeX

Text

#### Content

Citation Only

Citation and Abstract

Export

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

Close

This document does not have an outline.

JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all
the features on this page.

[Agricultural Economics](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150 "Go
to Agricultural Economics on ScienceDirect" )

[Volume 16, Issue
3](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3 "Go to table of
contents for this volume/issue" ), August 1997, Pages 185-192

[ ![Cover image](http://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/S01695150.gif)
](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3)

# Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: An analysis based on farm
size and ecological zone

Author links open the overlay panel. Numbers correspond to the affiliation
list which can be exposed by using the show more link.

Opens overlay Bedassa Tadesse ∗, a,
[JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG](mailto:JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG "author email" ),
Opens overlay S. Krishnamoorthy b

aDepartment of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Jimma College of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 307, Jimma, Ethiopia, IndiabDepartment of Agricultural
Economics, Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003, India

Accepted 18 March 1997, Available online 23 December 1997

Show more

### Choose an option to locate/access this article:

Check if you have access through your login credentials or your institution.

[Check
access](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169515097000042?_fmt=full
"Click to see if you have full text access" )

[ ![Get Full Text
Elsewhere](http://www.sciencedirect.com/scidirimg/gw_rtn_ihub.gif)
](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169515097000042?showall=true)

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

[doi:10.1016/S0169-5150(97)00004-2](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5150\(97\)00004-2
"Persistent link using digital object identifier" )

[Get rights and
content](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?publisherName=ELS&orderBeanReset=true&contentID=S0169515097000042
"Copyright Clearance Center \(new window\)" )

* * *

## Abstract

Despite the wider application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture,
little has been done on the investigation of intra and interecological
variations, size differences and their interactions. However, ecological
issues have paramount implications for the low-input sustainable agricultural
production. Furthermore, due to the various causes of efficiency, the age-old
size-based debate on efficiency differences is not yet resolved. The present
study examines the level of technical efficiency across ecological zones and
farm size groups in paddy farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
The study showed that 90% of the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms
in the state is due to differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power
and fertilisers have significant influence on the level of paddy production.
Varying from 0.59 to 0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83.
The use of _F_-test in two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored
regression (Tobit model), with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups
and their interactions, has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical
efficiency among paddy farms of the state differs significantly across agro-
ecological zones and size groups as well. The study further indicated that
small-sized paddy farms in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III
are represented by ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus
achieving higher technical efficiency.

* * *

open in overlay

    Corresponding author. Tel.: 002517110102, Fax: 002517110575

Copyright © 1997 Published by Elsevier B.V.

[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/)

[About ScienceDirect](http://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect)[Remote
access](/science/activateaccess)[Shopping
cart](/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74)[Contact
and support](/science/contactus)[Terms and
conditions](https://www.elsevier.com/legal/elsevier-website-terms-and-
conditions)[Privacy policy](http://www.elsevier.com/legal/privacy-policy)

Cookies are used by this site. For more information, visit the [cookies
page](https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect/support/cookies).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect
® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.

[RELX Group](http://www.relx.com/)

Close overlay

Close

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

# Other users also viewed these articles

![](http://cdn.els-cdn.com/sd/sci_dir/closeButton.png)

![Please wait...](//sdfestaticassets-us-
east-1.sciencedirectassets.com/prod/63172d2565d7c5115f2894922444490db0fadc2f/images/loader.gif)

Do not show again

