

  * Skip to Main Content
  * [Screen Reader Access](screenreaderaccess.html "Screen Reader Access" )
  * ![Decrease Text](imagedefault/a_decrease.png)
  * ![Normal Text](imagedefault/normal_icon.png)
  * ![Increase Text](imagedefault/a_increase.png)
  * [![High Contrast](imagedefault/highcontrast.png)](indexcontrast.html "High Contrast" )
  * ![Normal contrast](imagedefault/normal_icon.png)
  * [![Green Theme](imagedefault/green.png)](index.html "Green Theme" )
  * [![Blue Theme](imagedefault/blue.png)](indexblue.html "Blue Theme" )
  * [![Brown Theme](imagedefault/brown.png)](indexbrown.html "Brown Theme" )
  * हिंदी में

[![Farmer Portal, Ministry of Agriculture,Government of
India](imagedefault/title.png)](FarmerHome.aspx "Farmer Portal, Ministry of
Agriculture,Government of India" )  
![Farmer Portal](imagedefault/beta.png)

translate into :

  * [Insurance](insurance.html "Insurance" )
  * Storage
    * [CWC](CWC_Link.aspx "CWC" )
    * [Cold Stores ](COLD_STROAGE_Link.aspx "Cold Stores" )
    * [Grameen Bhandaran](NABARD_Link.aspx "Grameen Bhandaran" )
  * Credit
    * [Branch Locator](http://dbie.rbi.org.in/InfoViewApp/MOFSelectParam.jsp "Branch Locator" )
    * [Debt Relief ](debitrelief.html "Debt Relief" )
    * [Short Term Credit](shortloan.html "Short Term Credit" )
    * [Med./Long Term Loans ](midlongloan.html "Medium/Long Term Loans" )
    * [Agricultural Banking ](bank.html "Agricultural Banking" )
    * [Agricultural Credit ](agriculturecredit.html "Agricultural Credit" )
  * Crops
    * Wheat
      * [General Info](cropstaticswheat.html "General Info Wheat" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](http://ppqs.gov.in/pack/ipmpackage/wheat.pdf "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28s54q5qz3lgayuzmh3g2yfyvp%29%29/Report/crvVarietyList.aspx?code=A0104 "Seed Varieties" )
    * Maize
      * [General Info](cropstaticsmaize.html "General Info Maize" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](http://ppqs.gov.in/pack/ipmpackage/maize.pdf "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28s2ir4hsps1nvrmjihfwbi1hz%29%29/report/crvvarietyList.aspx?code=A0207 "Seed Varieties" )
    * Rice
      * [General Info](cropstaticsrice.html "General Info Rice" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](http://ppqs.gov.in/pack/ipmpackage/rice.pdf "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%281pwga0pui21xmclq0joyqxcz%29%29/Report/crvVarietyList.aspx?code=A0102 "Seed Varieties" )
      * [Diagnostic Tool](http://rkmp.co.in/diagnostic/ "Diagnostic Tool" )
    * Pulses
      * [General Info](cropstaticspulses.html "General Info Pulses" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](http://ppqs.gov.in/pack/ipmpackage/gram.pdf "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28sl04mcjsphwj2pjcc53auyws%29%29/Report/crvVarietyList.aspx?code=A03 "Seed Varieties" )
    * Jute
      * [General Info](cropstaticsjute.html "General Info Jute" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](pestanddiseasjute.html "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28s54q5qz3lgayuzmh3g2yfyvp%29%29/Report/crvVarietyList.aspx?code=A0502 "Seed Varieties" )
    * Sugarcane
      * [General Info](cropstaticssugarcane.html "General Info Sugarcane" )
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](http://ppqs.gov.in/pack/ipmpackage/sugar.pdf "Pest & Diseases" )
      * [Seed Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28s54q5qz3lgayuzmh3g2yfyvp%29%29/Report/crvVarietyList.aspx?code=A0701 "Seed Varieties" )
    * Other Crops
      * [Pest &amp; Diseases](IPMPackageofPractices.html "Pest & Diseases" )
  * Extension Activities
    * [Demonstrations](http://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in/DataEntryfrmRDL.aspx?optRpt=demo&Dcod=1 "Demonstrations" )
    * [Farmer Friend](http://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in/DataEntryfrmRDL.aspx?optRpt=frnd&Dcod=1 "Farmer Friend" )
    * [Farm School](http://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in/DataEntryfrmRDL.aspx?optRpt=demo&Dcod=1 "Farm School" )
  * Beneficiary List
    * [NHM](http://midhwf.nic.in/Masters/Dash.aspx "NHM" )
    * [NFSM](http://nfsm.gov.in/nfmis/rpt/total_beneficiaryCount.aspx "NFSM" )
  * MSP
    * [MSP Determination](mspdet.html "MSP Determination" )
    * [Questionnaire](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/ "Questionnaire" )
      * [Kharif](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=47 "Kharif" )
      * [Rabi](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=48 "Rabi" )
      * [Sugarcane ](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=49 "Sugarcane" )
      * [Copra](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=45 "Copra" )
      * [Jute](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=46 "Jute" )
      * [Palm Oil](http://cacp.dacnet.nic.in/KeyBullets.aspx?pid=69 "Palm Oil" )
    * Notified MSP
      * [Current](mspstatements.html "Current" )
      * [Archives](http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/MSP.htm "Archives" )
  * Animal Husbandry
    * [Schemes](http://www.dahd.nic.in/dahd/schemes.aspx "Schemes" )
    * [Guidelines](http://www.dahd.nic.in/dahd/guidelines.aspx "Guidelines" )
    * [Report Disease](http://www.nadrs.gov.in/SitePages/SMS%20System.aspx "Report Disease" )
  * Login
    * [Booklets and Fliers](NewPagewith.aspx "Booklets and Fliers" )
    * Agromet
      * [AFMU](http://farmer.gov.in/Negpa/login_negpa.aspx?masterlogin=AMFU "AFMU" )
      * [Met Center](http://farmer.gov.in/Negpa/login_negpa.aspx?masterlogin=MET "Met Center" )
      * [Regional Center](http://farmer.gov.in/Negpa/login_negpa.aspx?masterlogin=REG "Regional Center" )
      * [IMD HQ](http://farmer.gov.in/Negpa/login_negpa.aspx?masterlogin=IMD "IMD HQ" )
    * State
      * [Seed Dealer](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28rpwindlqgqyywg420vp3cit4%29%29/LoginForm.aspx "Seed Dealer" )
      * [Fertilizer/Pesticide Dealer](Dealer/LoginFertilizerPesticides.aspx?id=DealerS "Fertilizer/Pesticide Dealer" )
      * [POP](Dealer/LoginPop.aspx?id=pop "POP" )
      * [Storage](State_Storage_Login.aspx "Storage" )
      * [MSP](MSPLogin.aspx "MSP" )
      * [Booklets and Fliers](Dealer/BookletLogin.aspx?id=BAF&Apid=15 "Booklets and Fliers" )
    * District
      * [Seed Dealer](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/LoginDistrict.aspx "Seed Dealer" )
      * [Fertilizer Dealer](http://farmer.gov.in/Dealer/LoginFertilizerPesticides.aspx?mxPUkh5/Z7rmMeF+iAPusw== "Fertilizer Dealer" )
      * [Pesticide Dealer](http://farmer.gov.in/Dealer/LoginFertilizerPesticides.aspx?mxPUkh5/Z7p02190W6hG+A== "Pesticide Dealer" )
    * Farm Machinery
      * [Manufacturer/Trader](FarmMechanisation/Default.aspx "Manufacturer/Trader" )
        * [New Registration](FarmMechanisation/Login.aspx?id=Reg "New Registration" )
        * [Registered](FarmMechanisation/login.aspx?id=Equip "Registered" )
      * [Authentication Authority](FarmMechanisation/Default.aspx "Authentication Authority" )
        * [Association &amp; FMTTI ](FarmMechanisation/AssocationLogin.aspx "Association & FMTTI " )
        * [State](FarmMechanisation/login.aspx?id=AppS "State" )
      * [Dealer](FarmMechanisation/LoginDealer.aspx "Dealer" )
      * [M &amp; T Division](FarmMechanisation/Default.aspx "M & T Division" )
    * [Seed Avalibility](SeedAvailability/Login.aspx "Seed Avalibility" )
    * [NeGP-A](http://farmer.gov.in/recais/login.aspx "NeGP-A" )
    * Feedback
      * [Admin](feedback/FeedbackLogin.aspx "Admin" )
      * [Status](feedback/FeedbackStats.aspx "Status" )

  * [Home »](FarmerHome.aspx "Home Page" )
  * Maize Pests And Diseases

# Agriculture Corner

  * [Home Page ](FarmerHome.aspx "Home Page" )

  * [About Us](aboutus.html "About Us" )

  * Seeds
    * [Dealers](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28wexspd44ieauyxxmenc3txaz%29%29/dealers/searchmember.aspx "Dealers" )
    * [Availability](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/SQLReports/RptSeedAvailability.aspx "Availability" )
    * [Central Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%28k5qbir0ayjnfp0hmr3nnszxa%29%29/report/CentralVariety.aspx?CropCd=A0207 "Central Varieties" )
    * [Adaptable Varieties](http://smis.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%282paevpq0yp3fsah1glrkh5vk%29%29/Report/searchvarietyecology.aspx "Adaptable Varieties" )
    * [Quality Testing](http://seednet.ap.nic.in/ "Quality Testing" )
    * [Certification](http://seedcert.dacnet.nic.in/%28S%280aeh5dtmx0eq23bcqp3x5nsp%29%29/Login.aspx "Certification" )

  * Pesticide
    * [Dealers ](http://farmer.gov.in/pesticide_dealers_search.aspx "Dealers" )
    * [Crop Pest Database ](http://www.ncipm.org.in/agroweb/index.aspx "Crop Pest Database" )
    * [Precautions(Press Ad) ](imagedefault/Pesticide ad.jpg "Precautions\(Press Ad\)" )
    * [IPM](http://ppqs.gov.in/IpmDoDont.htm "Integrated Pest Management" )
    * [Best IPM Practices ](IPMPackageofPractices.html "Best IPM Practices" )
    * [State Wise Best Practices ](bestpackage.html "State Wise Best Practices" )
    * [Producers Registration](https://pesticides-registrationindia.nic.in/ "Registration" )

  * Farm Machinery
    * [Video Clips ](farmervideo/index.html "Video Clips" )
    * [Farmer Guide ](farmerguide.html "Farmer Guide" )
    * [Find A Machine ](dealer/SqlReports/Report2.aspx "Find A Machine" )
    * [Manufacturers](http://farmer.gov.in/dealer/SqlReports/Report3.aspx "Manufacturers" )
    * [Dealers](http://farmer.gov.in/dealer/SqlReports/Report1.aspx "Dealers" )

  * Fertiliser
    * [Dealers ](https://164.100.128.10/mfmsReports/GenDealerDashboardListing "Dealers" )
    * [Availability Information ](https://164.100.128.10/mfmsReports/GenDealerStockDashboardListing)
    * [Soil Test Report ](http://wbagrisnet.gov.in/SHC/SHC_home.aspx "Soil Test Report" )
    * [Soil Fertility Maps ](soilfertilitymaps.html "Soil Fertility Maps" )

  * Agromet Advisory
    * [English](http://www.imdagrimet.gov.in/node/3498 "Agromet Advisory" )
    * [Regional Language](http://www.imdagrimet.gov.in/node/3498 "Agromet Advisory" )

  * Farmer Friendly Material
    * [Booklets &amp; Flyers](booklets.html "Booklets & Flyers" )
    * [Handbooks ](handbooks.html "Handbooks" )
    * [Success Stories ](successstories.html "Success Stories" )
    * [Video Films](videofilms.html "Video Film" )
    * [Audio Clips](audiofilms.html "Audio Film" )

  * Market Price
    * [Other Agri Commodities ](marketprice.html "Other Agri Commodities" )
    * [Minor Forest Produce](http://www.trifed.in/trifed/\(S\(pfgb3bhr5lla4itmhzu1k2xx\)\)/present_status.aspx "Minor Forest Produce" )

  * Exports & Imports
    * [Agri Export Zones](http://farmer.gov.in/AgriExportZone/AgriExportReport.aspx "Agri Export Zones" )
    * [Benefit of Agri Export Zones ](imagedefault/About_AEZ.pdf "Benifit of Agri Export Zones" )

  * [Drought Management ](http://farmer.gov.in/Drought/Droughtreport.aspx "Drought Management" )

  * [Economics &amp; Statistics ](http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/ "Economics & Statistics" )

  * [Package of Practices ](packagestate.html "Package of Practices" )

  * [Programmes and Schemes ](schemes.html "Programmes and Schemes" )

[ ![Valid CSS!](http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/images/vcss-blue)
](http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/check/referer "Valid CSS! : External
website that opens in a new window" )

![About Us](imagedefault/farmerfriend1.jpg)

# Maize Pests And Diseases

Insect-pest management

Pink Borer (Sesamia inference)

Sesamia inference occurs during winter season particularly in peninsular
India. The moth of the Sesamia is nocturnal and lays eggs on lower leaf
sheath. The larvae of the Sesamia enter the plant near the base and cause
damage to stem.  
---  
![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize3.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize4.png) | Control of Chilo and Sesamia: For
control of Chilo and Sesamia, foliar spray of 0.1 % Endosulfan {700 ml (35 EC)
in 250 litre water} 10 days after germination is very effective. The Chilo can
also be controlled by release of 8 Trichocards (Trichogramma chilonis) per
hectare at 10 days after germination. Intercropping of maize with suitable
varieties of cowpea is an eco-friendly option for reducing the incidence of
Chilo on maize.  
  
Shoot fly (Atherigona sp.)

In South India it is a serious pest but it also appears on spring and summer
maize crop in North India. It attack mainly at seedling stage of the crop. The
tiny maggots creep down under the leaf sheaths till they reach the base of the
seedlings. After this they cut the growing point or central shoot which
results in to dead heart formation.  
---  
**Control of Shootfly**  
  
Sowing must be completed before first week of February so that the crop will
escape shootfly infestation.  
  
Spring sowing must be accompanied with seed treatment with Imidacloprid @
6ml/kg seed.  | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize5.png)  
  
Stem Borer (Chilo partellus)

Major pest of maize in India is Stalk borer. Chilo partellus, popularly known
as stalk borer that occurs during monsoon season is a major pest throughout
the country. Chilo lays eggs 10-25 days after germination on lower side of the
leaves. The larva of the Chilo enters in the whorl and cause damage in the
leaves  | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize1.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize2.png)  
---|---|---  
  
Termites (Odontotermes obesus)

![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize6.png). | Termite is also an important
pest in many areas. For control of termite fepronil granules should be applied
@ 20 kg ha-1 followed by light irrigation. If the termite incidence is in
patches, than spot application of fepronil @ 2-3 granuled/plant should be
done. Clean cultivation delays termite attack.  
---|---  
  
Other emerging pests

Recently some other non-traditional pests are also causing damage to maize
crop viz. larvae of American Bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera) which causes
damage to cob in Southern part of India while the Chaffer beetle (Chiloloba
acuta) feeds on maize pollen which adversely affects pollination in northern
part of India. | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize7.png)

**American bollworm**

| ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize8.png)

**Chaffer beetle**  
  
---|---|---  
Disease Management

Across the country several diseases occurs during different seasons, if they
are not managed at proper time than they leads to yield loss. BLSB, Pythium
stalk rot, Bacterial stalk rot, PFSRs, Polysora rust and Downy mildews are the
major constraints to be tackled for realizing genetic potential yield of the
crop. Estimated losses due to major diseases of maize in India is about 13.2%
of which foliar diseases (5 %), stalk rots, root rots, ear rots (5 %) cause
major yield losses. The major diseases and their management practices are
described as below:

Turcicum leaf blight (Exserohilum turcicum)

The disease is prevalent in cooler condition with high humidity of Jammu &amp;
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Meghalaya, Tripura, Assam,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujrat,
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Long, elliptical,
grayish green or tan lesions (2.5-15 cm) appear on lower leaves progressing
upward. Grow PEMH-5, Vivek 21, Vivek 23, Vivek 25, Pratap Kanchan 2,
Nithyashree in the recommended areas followed by need based sprays of mancozeb
@ 2.5 g/litre (with adjuant @ 0.05%) at 8-10 days interval.  
---  
![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize9.png)     ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize10.png)     ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize11.png)  
  
Turcicum leaf blight (Exserohilum turcicum)

It is a major disease in the states of Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh,
Sikkim, Meghalaya, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujrat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
having warm humid temperate to tropical climate in the cropping period.
Lesions on the leaves elongated between the veins, tan with buff to brown or
dark reddish brown borders. Lesion size may vary in inbreds and hybrids due to
different genetic backgrounds. Growing of HM 10, PAU 352, Malviya Hybrid Makka
2, EMH 1, HQPM 7, HQPM 5, HQPM 1, Shaktiman 3, Shaktiman 4, PEMH– 5, HQPM-4,
and HSC-1 with need based sprays of mancozeb or zineb @ 2.5g/litre of water. |
![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize12.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize13.png)  
---|---|---  
  
Common rust (Puccinia sorghi)

This rust attacks in the maize growing areas with subtropical temperate and
high land environment of Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim,
Meghalaya, West Bengal, Punjab (Rabi), Haryana (Rabi), Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar (Rabi), Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu. It appears at the time of tasseling. The circular to elongate,
golden brown to cinnamon brown pustules are visible over both leaf surfaces
changing to brownish black at plant maturity. Adopt promising hybrids/
varieties viz.; Buland, Sheetal, HHM 1, HHM 2 and HQPM 1, Nithyashree. Spray
of mancozeb@ 2.5g/litre of water at first appearance of pustules. Prefer early
maturing varieties.

  * [Home](FarmerHome.aspx "Home Page" )
  * [About Us](aboutus.html "About Us" )
  * [Help](help.html "Help" )
  * [Weather Forecast](http://agricoop.nic.in/weather.html "Weather Forecast" )
  * [Feedback ](feedback/Default.aspx "Feedback" )
  * [RTI](http://agricoop.nic.in/ecitizen.html "RTI" )
  * [Sitemap](sitemap.html "Sitemap" )
  * [Accessibility Statement](accessibility.html "Accessibility Statement" )
  * [Website Policy ](websitepolicy.html "Website Policy" )

This website belongs to Department of Agriculture &amp; Cooperation,  
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India  
17 August, 2015

