[![Previous Page](back.gif)](t0800e09.htm#TopOfPage) [![Table of
Contents](toc.gif)](t0800e00.htm#Contents) [![Next
Page](next.gif)](t0800e0b.htm#TopOfPage)

* * *

#  I. WATER RESOURCE ISSUES AND AGRICULTURE

* * *

> [ Introduction and overview](t0800e0a.htm#b1-Introduction%20and%20overview)  
>  [ Purpose and scope](t0800e0a.htm#b2-Purpose%20and%20scope)  
>  [ World water resources](t0800e0a.htm#b3-World%20water%20resources)  
>  [ The water sector and natural resource
policy](t0800e0a.htm#b4-The%20water%20sector%20and%20natural%20resource%20policy)  
>

* * *

##  Introduction and overview

An interesting observation arising from the preparation of this year's special
chapter on water and agriculture is how difficult it is to generalize about
water. Almost any statement requires qualification. For example, while we can
say that water is one of the most abundant resources on earth, we know that
less than 1 percent of the total supply is reliably available for human
consumption. Water is a liquid for the most part, but it can also be a solid
and a vapour. Drinking-water is certainly essential for human survival but
water-related illnesses are the most common health threat in the developing
world. An estimated 25 000 people die every day as a result of water-related
sicknesses.1

> 1 UNEP. 1991. _Freshwater pollution._ UNEP/ GEMS Environmental Library. No.
6. Nairobi.

One statement, however, needs no qualification: human existence depends on
water. The geosphere, the atmosphere and the biosphere are all linked to
water. Water interacts with solar energy to determine climate and it
transforms and transports the physical and chemical substances necessary for
all life on earth.

In recent years, water issues have been the focus of increasing international
concern and debate. From 26 to 31 January 1992, the UN system sponsored the
International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE) in Dublin,
Ireland. The ICWE called for innovative approaches to the assessment,
development and management of freshwater resources. In addition, the ICWE
provided policy guidance for the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. UNCED highlighted the need
for water sector reforms throughout the world.

In 1993, the World Bank issued a comprehensive policy paper defining its new
objectives for the water sector. FAO recently established an International
Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development (IAP-
WASAD). Likewise, the UNDP, WHO, UNICEF, WMO, Unesco and UNEP are all
coordinating or participating in special programmes related to water
resources.

Other international, national and local organizations are becoming more active
in water issues. The 1990 Montreal meeting, "NGOs Working Together", focused
attention on drinking-water supply and sanitation. The Canadian International
Development Agency, the French Ministry of Cooperation and Development, the
German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), the United Kingdom's Overseas
Development Administration and the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) have recently developed water resource strategies for
foreign assistance.

The message highlighted by all these efforts is that water is an increasingly
scarce and valuable resource. Of principal concern is our failure to recognize
and accept that there is a finite supply of water. The consensus is that the
growing water scarcity and misuse of freshwater pose serious threats to
sustainable development.

Competition among agriculture, industry and cities for limited water supplies
is already constraining development efforts in many countries. As populations
expand and economies grow, the competition for limited supplies will intensify
and so will conflicts among water users.

Despite water shortages, misuse of water is widespread. Small communities and
large cities, farmers and industries, developing countries and industrialized
economies are all mismanaging water resources. Surface water quality is
deteriorating in key basins from urban and industrial wastes.

Groundwater is polluted from surface sources and irreversibly damaged by the
intrusion of salt water. Overexploited aquifers are losing their capacity to
hold water and lands are subsiding. Cities are unable to provide adequate
drinking-water and sanitation facilities. Waterlogging and salinization are
diminishing the productivity of irrigated lands. Decreasing water flows are
reducing hydroelectric power generation, pollution assimilation and fish and
wildlife habitats.

At first glance, most of these water problems do not appear to be directly
related to the agricultural sector. Yet, by far the largest demand for the
world's water comes from agriculture. More than two-thirds of the water
withdrawn from the earth's rivers, lakes and aquifers is used for irrigation.
As competition, conflicts, shortages, waste, overuse and degradation of water
resources grow, policy-makers look increasingly to agriculture as the system's
safety valve.

Agriculture is not only the world's largest water user in terms of volume, it
is also a relatively low-value, low-efficiency and highly subsidized water
user. These facts are forcing governments and donors to rethink the economic,
social and environmental implications of large publicly funded and operated
irrigation projects. In the past, domestic spending for irrigation dominated
agricultural budgets in countries throughout the world. For instance, since
1940, 80 percent of Mexico's public expenditures in agriculture have been for
irrigation projects. In China, Indonesia and Pakistan, irrigation has absorbed
more than half of agricultural investment. In India, about 30 percent of all
public investment has gone into irrigation.2

> 2 R. Bhatia and M. Falkenmark. 1992. _Water resource policies and the urban
poor:_ _innovative approaches and policy imperatives. _Background paper for
the ICWE, Dublin, Ireland.

A significant portion of international development assistance has also been
used to establish irrigation systems. Irrigation received nearly 30 percent of
World Bank agricultural lending during the 1980s. Spending commitments for
irrigation by all aid agencies exceeded $2 billion per year in the past
decade.

Once established, irrigation projects become some of the most heavily
subsidized economic activities in the world. In the mid-1980s, Repetto3
estimated that average subsidies to irrigation in six Asian countries covered
90 percent of the total operating and maintenance costs. Case-studies indicate
that irrigation fees are, on average, less than 8 percent of the value of
benefits derived from irrigation.

> 3 R. Repetto. 1986. _Skimming the water: rent-seeking and the performance of
public irrigation systems._ Research Report No. 4. Washington, DC, WRI.

Despite these huge investments and subsidies, irrigation performance
indicators are falling short of expectations for yield increases, area
irrigated and technical efficiency in water use. As much as 60 percent of the
water diverted or pumped for irrigation is wasted.4 Although some losses are
inevitable, in too many cases this excess water seeps back into the ground,
causing waterlogging and salinity. As much as one-quarter of all irrigated
land in developing countries suffers from varying degrees of salinization.5
Moreover, stagnant water and poor irrigation drainage escalate the incidence
of water-related diseases, resulting in human suffering and increased health
costs.

> 4 FAO. 1990. _An International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable
Agricultural Development._ Rome.

>

> 5 Ibid.

Today, agriculture is often unable to compete economically for scarce water.
Cities and industries can afford to pay more for water and earn a higher
economic rate of return from a unit of water than does agriculture. (For
economists, water flows uphill to money.) For the first time in many
countries, agriculture is being obliged to give up water for higher-value uses
in cities and industries. Irrigators in some areas are now asked to pay for
the water they receive, including the full cost of water delivery. In other
areas, new regulations require farmers to pay for polluting streams, lakes and
aquifers.

The irony is that irrigated agriculture is expected to produce much more in
the future while using less water than it uses today. At present, 2.4 billion
people depend on irrigated agriculture for jobs, food and income (some 55
percent of all wheat and rice output is irrigated). Over the next 30 years, an
estimated 80 percent of the additional food supplies required to feed the
world will depend on irrigation.6

> 6 International Irrigation Management Institute. 1992. _Developing
environmentally sound and lasting improvements in irrigation management: the
role of international research. _Colombo, Sri Lanka, IIMI.

These developments are placing enormous pressure on agricultural policy-makers
and farmers. Throughout the world, governments assume the prime responsibility
for ensuring food security and, because food depends increasingly on
irrigation, food security is closely linked with water security. Between 30
and 40 percent of the world's food comes from the irrigated 16 percent of the
total cultivated land; around one-fifth of the total value of fish production
comes from freshwater aquaculture; and current global livestock drinking-water
requirements are 60 billion litres per day (forecasts estimate an increase of
0.4 billion litres per year). Food security in the next century will be
closely allied to success in irrigation.

Irrigation can help make yield-increasing innovations a more attractive
investment proposition but it does not guarantee crop yield increases. The
overall performance of many irrigation projects has been disappointing because
of poor scheme conception, inadequate construction and implementation or
ineffective management. The mediocre performance of the irrigation sector is
also contributing to many socio-economic and environmental problems, but these
problems are neither inherent in the technology nor inevitable, as is
sometimes argued.

Irrigation projects can contribute greatly to increased incomes and
agricultural production compared with rain-fed agriculture. In addition,
irrigation is more reliable and allows for a wider and more diversified choice
of cropping patterns as well as the production of higher-value crops.
Irrigation's contribution to food security in China, Egypt, India, Morocco and
Pakistan is widely recognized. For example, in India, 55 percent of
agricultural output is from irrigated land. Moreover, average farm incomes
have increased from 80 to 100 percent as a result of irrigation, while yields
have doubled compared with those achieved under the former rain-fed
conditions; incremental labour days used per hectare have increased by 50 to
100 percent. In Mexico, half the value of agriculture production and two-
thirds of the value of agricultural exports is from the one-third of arable
land that is irrigated.

Irrigation is a key component of the technical package needed to achieve
productivity gains. In the future, as high levels of costly inputs are added
to cropland to sustain yield increases, the security and efficiency of
irrigated production will become even more important to world farming. Water
will no longer be plentiful and cheap. It will be scarce, expensive to develop
and maintain and valuable in use. The prospect of high-cost water may at first
seem to be another problem looming for low-income economies. However, the high
cost will be an incentive to use water more efficiently. The single most
important factor limiting the adoption of proven irrigation and drainage
technology is the low cost of water. Moreover, if farmers have opportunities
for higher-value uses and can make profits, both governments and farmers will
invest in irrigation.

This water dilemma - to produce more in a sustainable way with less water -
points to the need for demand management mechanisms to reallocate existing
supplies, encourage more efficient use and promote more equitable access.
Policy-makers need to establish a structure of incentives, regulations,
permits, restrictions and penalties that will help guide, influence and
coordinate how people use water while encouraging innovations in water-saving
technologies.

In the past, supply-side approaches dominated water resource management
practices. Water itself was physically managed through technical and
engineering means that captured, stored, delivered and treated water. However,
the era of meeting growing demand by developing new supplies is ending. In our
present-day water economy, resource management is shifting away from the goal
of capturing more water towards that of designing demand- and user-focused
approaches that influence behaviour.

##  Purpose and scope

This special chapter is primarily intended for agricultural policy-makers,
water managers, researchers, students, development planners and agricultural
project donors. It is meant to help us reflect on the way water resources are
managed at present; to contribute to the discussion on sustainable water use;
and to stimulate thinking, research and change. Decisions made in this decade
regarding how water is used will have a profound effect on our future
supplies.

This first section gives an overview of world water resources and briefly
discusses the key issues: scarcity, quality and health.

The second section stresses the need to integrate the water sector with the
national economy and analyses the physical, economic and social aspects of
water. It then provides a conceptual foundation for understanding the
circumstances under which water policies either work or fail. Section II also
assesses the advantages and disadvantages of broad alternative approaches to
public water policy.

Section III examines how policy analysis is applied to water resource
planning, including both supply-side (physical and hydrological) and demand-
side considerations. It discusses the advantages and disadvantages of various
policy options for urgent water policy issues related to surface water and
groundwater.

The fourth and final section reviews three specific policy issues in irrigated
agriculture: declining growth and investment trends; the difficulties imposed
by irrigation-induced environmental degradation; and efforts to reform
managerial and administrative systems.

![](t0800e14.jpg)

_BOX 8_

**THE HYDROLOGICAL** **CYCLE**

Water continuously circulates on the planet. The hydrological cycle has no
beginning or end but we can describe it as starting with the waters of the
oceans, which cover about three-quarters of the earth. Radiation from the sun
and wind energy, which is itself indirectly derived from solar energy, cause
evaporation of water which rises as a vapour and forms clouds. In turn, if
conditions are right, these condense and fall back to earth as rain, hail or
snow.

Some of this precipitation evaporates from leaves and soil, some runs over the
surface and forms streams and some percolates into the soil where it may be
drawn on by plants and transpired back into the atmosphere or returned to the
surface by soil capillarity. Some soil moisture evaporates and some soaks down
below the root zone to join the groundwater reservoir. Groundwater percolates
through pores in the soil and rocks and may reappear on the surface at lower
elevations as a spring or as seepage into streams and rivers which eventually
re-enter the ocean. Still some lies in the groundwater reservoir or aquifer
and may be tapped by a mechanical tube well or an open well.

The hydrological cycle illustrated in the Figure is the system by which water
circulates from the oceans through the atmosphere and back to the ocean
overland and underground. Available freshwater is a rare form of water, for 99
percent is either saline (97 percent of all water is in the ocean) or frozen
(2 percent in the ice caps and glaciers). Most of the remainder (1 percent) is
groundwater with minute proportions in freshwater lakes, soil moisture, rivers
and biological systems.  
  
---  
  

##  World water resources

* * *

> [ Water scarcity](t0800e0a.htm#b5-Water%20scarcity)  
>  [ World water use](t0800e0a.htm#b6-World%20water%20use)  
>  [ Water and health](t0800e0a.htm#b7-Water%20and%20health)  
>  [ Water as a strategic
resource](t0800e0a.htm#b8-Water%20as%20a%20strategic%20resource)  
>

* * *

Every day the hydrological cycle renews the world's freshwater resources
through evaporation and precipitation (see Box 8). The average annual rainfall
over land is 110 000 km3, but some 70 000 km3 evaporate before reaching the
sea. The remaining 40 000 km3 are potentially available for human use. Global
freshwater consumption is currently around 4 000 km3, only 10 percent of the
annual renewable supply.

These numbers suggest that plenty of water is available for human use but a
closer look reveals a more complicated situation. The 40 000 km3 of available
water are distributed very unevenly and two-thirds of it runs off in floods.
That leaves around 14 000 km3 as a relatively stable supply. A substantial
share of this supply should be left to follow its natural course in order to
safeguard wetlands, deltas, lakes and rivers.7 For example, 6 000 km3 of water
is needed to dilute and transport the estimated 450 km3 of waste water now
entering the world's rivers each year.8 Without substantial investment in
waste water treatment and more effective regulation, even more water will have
to be diverted to dilute and transport wastes.

> 7 S. Postel. 1992. _Last oasis: facing water scarcity._ New York, Norton.  
> 8 See footnote 1.

Precipitation, withdrawals and availability of water vary widely around the
world. Table 6 demonstrates regional changes in per caput water availability
since 1950 and shows forecasts for 2000. Per caput availability is highest in
Latin America and lowest in North Africa and the Near East, while withdrawals
are highest in North America and lowest in Africa. Per caput water
availability in Europe and North America is not expected to change greatly by
2000, while Asians, Africans and Latin Americans will face less per caput
water availability as their populations continue to grow.

At present, Asia accounts for over one-half of the world's water withdrawals.
Figure 11 illustrates regional water consumption during the past century.
Forecasts to the year 2000 suggest that Asia will consume 60 percent of the
world's water, followed by 15 percent in North America, 13 percent in Europe
and less than 7 percent in Africa. Latin America's share of world water
consumption is forecast to be less than 5 percent in 2000, although the
region's consumption has nearly quadrupled since 1950.

###  Water scarcity

Human actions bring about water scarcity in three ways: through population
growth, misuse and inequitable access.9 Population growth contributes to
scarcity simply because the available water supply must be divided among more
and more people. Every country has a more or less fixed amount of internal
water resources, defined as the average annual flow of rivers and aquifers
generated from precipitation. Overtime, this internal renewable supply must be
divided among more and more people, eventually resulting in water scarcity.

> 9 T.F. Homer-Dixon, J.H. Boutwell and G.W. Rathjens. 1993. Environmental
change and violent conflict. _Sci_. _Am._ (February).

_TABLE 6_

**Per caput water availability by region, 1950-2000**

**Region**  
|

**1950**  
|

**1960**  
|

**1970**  
|

**1980**  
|

**2000**  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
  
|

(...........................'000 m3...........................)  
  
  
Africa  
|

20.6  
|

16.5  
|

12.7  
|

9.4  
|

5.1  
  
  
Asia  
|

9.6  
|

7.9  
|

6.1  
|

5.1  
|

3.3  
  
  
Latin America  
|

105.0  
|

80.2  
|

61.7  
|

48.8  
|

28.3  
  
  
Europe  
|

5.9  
|

5.4  
|

4.9  
|

4.4  
|

4.1  
  
  
North America  
|

37.2  
|

30.2  
|

25.2  
|

21.3  
|

17.5  
  
  
> _Source:_ N.B. Ayibotele. 1992. The _world's water: assessing the resource._
Keynote paper at the ICWE, Dublin, Ireland.

When annual internal renewable water resources are less than 1 000 m3 per
caput, water availability is considered a severe constraint on socio-economic
development and environmental protection. Table 7 lists the countries where
per caput internal renewable water availability will fall below 1 000 m3 by
the end of this decade. Most countries facing chronic water scarcity problems
are in North Africa, the Near East and sub-Saharan Africa. Countries with less
than 2 000 m3 per caput face a serious marginal water scarcity situation, with
major problems occurring in drought years. By the end of the 1990s, water
availability is expected to fall below 2 000 m3 per caput in more than 40
countries.

In many countries, while scarcity is less of a problem at a national level,
serious water shortages are causing difficulties in specific regions and
watersheds. Notable examples include northern China, western and southern
India and parts of Mexico.

People also bring about water scarcity by polluting and overusing existing
supplies. Box 9 describes some of the pressing water pollution issues. This
type of scarcity can be regarded as the consumption of the resource's
"capital". For instance, an aquifer represents resource capital, providing
what is generally a renewable source of water "income" that can be tapped for
human consumption. Sustainable use of the aquifer leaves the capital intact so
that future generations can continuously use the renewable portion or income.
If pumping is greater than recharge, the aquifer is depleted and the capital
is consumed.

Overuse of groundwater has become a major problem in China, India, Indonesia,
Mexico, the Near East, North Africa, Thailand, the western United States and
many island countries where seawater intrusion results.

The overpumping of aquifers not only results in a water source that is too
depleted to serve as a supply, it may also cause the land above the aquifer to
settle or subside, resulting in widespread structural damage in extreme cases.
Bangkok and Mexico City are well-known examples.

Finally, a shift in access or distribution patterns may concentrate water
resources among one group and subject others to extreme scarcity. In many
cities of the developing world, large numbers of people depend on water
vendors and may pay 100 times as much as the rate of public utilities (see
Table 8). Numerous recent studies document that large numbers of urban poor
pay much higher prices and a much larger share of their income for water than
families with access to a city water system.10 Poor families in some large
cities spend up to 20 percent of their income on water. When the cost is so
high, they use little water for washing and bathing, which results in serious
health problems.

> 10 See footnote 2.

_TABLE 7_

**Countries predicted to have scarce water resources** in 2000

**Country1**  

  |

**Population in 2000**  
|

**Water availability**  
  
---|---|---  
  
  
|

**Internal renewable water resources**  
|

**Water resources including river flows from other countries**  
  
  
_(millions)_  
|

_(....m3 per caput....)_  
  
  
Egypt  
|

62.4  
|

29  
|

934  
  
  
Saudi Arabia  
|

21.3  
|

103  
|

103  
  
  
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya  
|

6.5  
|

108  
|

108  
  
  
United Arab Emirates  
|

2.0  
|

152  
|

152  
  
  
Jordan  
|

4.6  
|

153  
|

240  
  
  
Mauritania  
|

2.6  
|

154  
|

2843  
  
  
Yemen  
|

16.2  
|

155  
|

155  
  
  
Israel  
|

6.4  
|

260  
|

335  
  
  
Tunisia  
|

9.8  
|

384  
|

445  
  
  
Syrian Arab Republic  
|

17.7  
|

430  
|

2008  
  
  
Kenya  
|

34.0  
|

436  
|

436  
  
  
Burundi  
|

7.4  
|

487  
|

487  
  
  
Algeria  
|

33.1  
|

570  
|

576  
  
  
Hungary  
|

10.1  
|

591  
|

11 326  
  
  
Rwanda  
|

10.4  
|

604  
|

604  
  
  
Botswana  
|

1.6  
|

622  
|

11 187  
  
  
Malawi  
|

11.8  
|

760  
|

760  
  
  
Oman  
|

2.3  
|

880  
|

880  
  
  
Sudan  
|

33.1  
|

905  
|

3923  
  
  
Morocco  
|

31.8  
|

943  
|

943  
  
  
Somalia  
|

10.6  
|

1 086  
|

1 086  
  
  
> 1 A number of other countries with smaller populations, e.g. Barbados, Cape
Verde, Djibouti, Malta, Qatar and Singapore, are also included in the water-
scarce category. _Source:_ FAO calculations based on World Bank/WRI data.

_TABLE 8_

**Ratio of prices charged by vendors to prices charged by public utilities in selected cities**

**Country**  
|

**City**  
|

**Ratio**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Bangladesh  
|

Dacca  
|

12-25  
  
  
Colombia  
|

Cali  
|

10  
  
  
Cote d'Ivoire  
|

Abidjan  
|

5  
  
  
Ecuador  
|

Guayaquil  
|

20  
  
  
Haiti  
|

Port-au-Prince  
|

17-100  
  
  
Honduras  
|

Tegucigalpa  
|

16-34  
  
  
Indonesia  

  |

Jakarta  
|

4-60  
  
  
Surabaja  
|

20-60  
  
  
Kenya  
|

Nairobi  
|

7-11  
  
  
Mauritania  
|

Nouakchott  
|

100  
  
  
Nigeria  

  |

Lagos  
|

4-10  
  
  
Onitsha  
|

6-38  
  
  
Pakistan  
|

Karachi  
|

28-83  
  
  
Peru  
|

Lima  
|

17  
  
  
Togo  
|

Lome  
|

7-10  
  
  
Turkey  
|

Istanbul  
|

10  
  
  
Uganda  
|

Kampala  
|

4-9  
  
  
> _Source:_ R. Bhatia and M. Falkenmark. 1992. _Water resource policies and
the urban poor: innovative approaches and policy imperatives._ Background
paper for the ICWE, Dublin, Ireland.

[** Figure 11 WATER CONSUMPTION BY REGION, 1900-2000**](t0800e15.jpg)

[** Figure 12 WORLD WATER CONSUMPTION ACCORDING TO USE**](t0800e16.jpg)

> _Source:_ I.A. Shiklomanov. 1990. Global water resources.  
> Note: Consumption by reservoirs is through evaporation  
> _Nat. Resour.,_ 26: 34-43

###  World water use

The early civilizations of Asia, Africa and Latin America organized
cooperative efforts to develop river valleys for irrigated agriculture.
Through irrigation technology, societies controlled and manipulated natural
water supplies to improve crop production. The result was often reliable and
ample food supplies which led to the creation of stable agricultural villages,
the division of labour and economic surpluses.

Many scholars still argue over whether irrigation technology facilitated
political control and development of the state or whether political
developments led to advancement of the technology. No matter the direction of
cause and effect, no one disputes the association of development with control
over water use.

In today's world, agriculture still accounts for the majority of human water
use. Globally, around 70 percent of water withdrawals are for agriculture.
Domestic and industrial uses consume the remaining 30 percent.11

> 11 Domestic uses include drinking-water supplies, private homes, commercial
establishments, public services and municipal supplies.

Water uses differ greatly depending on access, quantity, quality and socio-
economic conditions. For example, Table 9 illustrates that agricultural water
use is higher as a proportion of total water use in the low-income countries
(91 percent) than in the high-income group (39 percent).

_TABLE 9_

**Sectoral water withdrawals, by income group**

**Country income group**  
|

**Annual withdrawals per caput**  
|

**Withdrawals by sector**  
  
---|---|---  
  
  
|

  
|

**Agric.**  
|

**Ind. **  
|

**Dom.**  
  
  
  
|

_(...m3...)_  
|

_(_................%.........._)_  
  
  
Low-income  
|

386  
|

91  
|

5  
|

4  
  
  
Middle-income  
|

453  
|

69  
|

18  
|

13  
  
  
High-income  
|

1 167  
|

39  
|

47  
|

14  
  
  
> _Source:_ World Bank. 1992. _World Development Report _1992, based on WRI
data.

Nevertheless, on a per caput basis, the high-income countries use more water
for agricultural purposes than the low-income countries.

The trends in world water use during this century are presented in Figure 12.
Overall, global water consumption has increased almost tenfold. Agriculture's
share, which was 90 percent in 1900, will have dropped to an estimated 62
percent by 2000. During this same period, industrial consumption will have
grown from 6 percent to 25 percent, while consumption by cities will have
increased from 2 percent to nearly 9 percent. By 2000, around 35 percent of
available water supplies will be in use, compared with less than 5 percent at
the beginning of the century.

Water quantity and quality requirements also differ widely depending on the
type of use. Net agricultural requirements are especially large in relation to
other uses. For instance, around 15 000 m3 of water are normally sufficient to
irrigate 1 ha of rice. This same amount of water can supply: 100 nomads and
450 head of stock for three years; or 100 rural families through house
connections for four years; or 100 urban families for two years; or 100 luxury
hotel guests for 55 days.12

> 12 I. Carruthers and C. dark. 1983. _The economics of irrigation._
Liverpool, Liverpool University Press.

_BOX 9_

**WATER AND POLLUTION**

The quality of water from different sources varies widely. Precipitation
absorbs gases from the atmosphere and removes particles from the air. When the
precipitation strikes the ground it becomes surface water runoff or enters the
ground. The surface water flows into larger and larger channels, ponds, lakes
and rivers until some of it reaches the sea. Along its course, surface water
picks up both organic and mineral particles, bacteria and other organisms as
well as salts and other soluble substances. The water in lakes and swamps
sometimes acquires odours, tastes and colours from algae and other organisms
and from decaying vegetation.

Since ancient times, heavy metals from mining and pathogens from cities have
caused serious, although localized, contamination. Since the industrial
revolution, water pollution problems have become first regional, then
continental and now global in nature. Much water is polluted when it is used
in industry and agriculture or for domestic purposes. Mining is the major
cause of metal contamination, whereas other industries contribute to
acidification. The intensification of agricultural activities has led to the
contamination of groundwater by fertilizers and other chemicals. Moreover,
irrigation projects often cause a rapid rise in the level of groundwater,
which leads to waterlogging and soil salinity.

Since 1977, the UNEP/ WHO Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) has been
working with Unesco and WMO to develop a global water quality monitoring
network. More than 50 water variables are monitored to provide information on
the suitability of water for human consumption and for agricultural,
commercial and industrial use. Recent assessments have found that the main
water pollutants are: sewage, nutrients, toxic metals and industrial as well
as agricultural chemicals.

Conclusions drawn from the GEMS assessment include: the nature and level of
freshwater pollution strongly depends on socio-economic development; the most
common water pollutant is organic material from domestic sewage, municipal
waste and agro-industrial effluent; and the high water nitrate levels found in
Western Europe and the United States are a result of the nitrogen fertilizers
and manure used for intensive agriculture. The GEMS assessment also noted a
dramatic increase in the use of fertilizers in developing countries,
particularly where intensive irrigation allows for double or triple cropping.

Other conditions highlighted in the GEMS report include deforestation,
eutrophication, suspended particulate matter (SM) and salinity.

Deforestation, i.e. the clearing of land for agriculture and urban
development, often leads to water contamination. When the soil is stripped of
its protective vegetative covering, it becomes prone to erosion. This in turn
leads to higher water turbidity, because of the increased amounts of suspended
matter, to nutrient leaching and to a decreased water-retention capacity of
the soil. There is also concern about the destruction of wetlands, which
destroys the habitat of many species and removes natural filter mechanisms,
permitting many common pollutants to reach water supplies.

Eutrophication is the enrichment of waters with nutrients, especially
phosphorus and nitrogen. It can lead to enhanced plant growth and depleted
oxygen levels as this plant material decays. It is not always a human-induced
problem, but is often linked to organic waste and agricultural runoff. Today
30 to 40 percent of the world's lakes and reservoirs are eutrophic. Not all
interventions have proved successful, but eutrophication can be reversible if
mid- and long-term strategies are enacted. Laws and measures introduced to
reduce tripolyphosphates (used mostly in detergents) and to remove phosphorus
from waste water have had positive effects.

SM consists of materials that float in suspension in water. There are three
main sources of SM: natural soil erosion, matter formed organically within a
water body and material produced as a by-product of human activity. SM settles
on the sediment bed and forms deposits in rivers, lakes, deltas and estuaries.
Evidence of human-induced SM from Roman and Mayan times has been discovered in
lake beds, implying that this was one of the first types of water pollution.
River damming affects the amount of SM flowing from rivers to the oceans
because reservoirs act as effective sinks for SM. An estimated 10 percent of
the global SM discharge to the sea is trapped in reservoirs. Approximately 25
percent of the water currently flowing to the oceans has been previously
stored in a reservoir. Damming can also greatly modify water quality; waters
flowing out of reservoirs not only have reduced SM quantities, they are also
depleted of nutrients and are often more saline, which consequently has
detrimental effects on downstream agriculture and fisheries.

Salinity is a significant and widespread form of freshwater pollution,
particularly in arid, semi-arid and some coastal regions. The primary cause of
salinization is a combination of poor drainage and high evaporation rates
which concentrate salts on irrigated land. Salinity can adversely affect the
productivity of irrigated crops and is also detrimental to industrial and
household water users. It is not a new phenomenon; salinization of soil and
water in the flood plain of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers contributed to the
decline of the Mesopotamian civilization some 6 000 years ago. The estimated
global gross area of irrigated land is 270 million ha. About 20 to 30 million
ha are severely affected by salinity while an additional 60 to 80 million ha
are affected to some degree. Waterlogged soil, which aggravates the problem of
salinity, is usually caused by overwatering and a lack of proper drainage
systems. Runoff from agricultural areas fertilized with manure and chemicals
pollutes watercourses and groundwater by increasing levels of nutrients.

The present level of water pollution warrants that steps be taken to control
further contamination of water resources. More serious action needs to be
taken in water resource management, waste water treatment and the provision of
safe public water supplies. In developed and developing countries there should
be controls and regulations regarding the treatment and recycling of
industrial effluents, while efforts must be made to replace harmful products
and ban dangerous pesticides.

There is compelling evidence that at least 20 to 30 percent of the water
currently used in households and industries can be saved by adopting
appropriate regulatory and policy instruments (tariffs, quotas, groundwater
extraction charges). The twin benefits of clean water and reduced demand can
be obtained if the recycling or reuse of water is encouraged in industries
through pollution control legislation and economic incentives (water tariffs
based on economic costs, effluent charges and low-interest loans for effluent
and sewage treatment plants). Similar savings may be possible in irrigated
agriculture by investments in canal lining, by encouraging less water-
intensive crops (through relative output prices) and by raising irrigation
rates.  
  
---  
  
> _Source:_ UNEP. 1991. _Freshwater pollution._ UNEP/ GEMS Environmental
Library. No. 6. Nairobi.

Industry requires large amounts of water, but most of it is recycled back into
the water system. The major problem is that much of this water is returned
polluted with wastes, chemicals and heavy metals. Over 85 percent of total
withdrawals by industry are recycled as waste water.13

> 13 D.B. Gupta. 1992. The importance of water resources for urban
socioeconomic development. In _International Conference on Water and the
Environment: Development Issues for the 21st Century._ Keynote Papers. Dublin,
Ireland.

Domestic water demand is moderate in comparison with agriculture and industry
but its quality requirements are high. Domestic and municipal water uses
include drinking, washing, food preparation and sanitation.

###  Water and health

Two of the most troubling domestic water supply issues for policy-makers are
access and health. Nearly one billion people in the world are without clean
drinking-water. Providing easier access to safe drinking-water significantly
improves health conditions. Personal hygiene increases when water availability
rises above 50 litres per day (which generally means that it must be delivered
to the house or yard). An estimated 1.7 billion persons contend with
inadequate sanitation facilities. The lack of sewage collection and treatment
is a major source of surface and groundwater pollution.

Health officials identify five categories of disease related to water: _i)_
water-borne diseases (typhoid, cholera, dysentery, gastroenteritis and
infectious hepatitis); _ii) _water-washed infections of the skin and eyes
(trachoma, scabies, yaws, leprosy, conjunctivitis and ulcers); _iii) _water-
based diseases (schistosomiasis and guinea-worm); _iv) _diseases from water-
related insect vectors such as mosquitoes and blackflies; and _v)_ infections
caused by defective sanitation (hookworm).

The World Bank's _World Development Report 1992_ estimates that providing
access to safe water and adequate sanitation could result in two million fewer
deaths from diarrhoea among young children and 200 million fewer episodes of
diarrhoeal illnesses each year.

###  Water as a strategic resource

Water, even when plentiful, is frequently drawn into the realm of politics.
Domestic laws and well-established customs can help resolve water-related
disputes at national and village levels but international law has not
developed fast enough to deal with the growing number of water-related
conflicts between many countries and regions. In 1989, Egypt's then Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs, Boutros-Ghali, declared: "The national security
of Egypt is in the hands of the eight other African countries in the Nile
basin."14 As Postel notes, Boutros-Ghali highlights the importance of water to
Egypt's economy as well as the advantage upstream countries have over
downstream neighbours.

> 14 See footnote 7.

The increasing value of water, concern about water quality and quantity, and
problems of access and denial have given rise to the concept of resource
geopolitics or "hydropolitics". In this context, water joins petroleum and
certain minerals as a strategic resource. Its increasing scarcity and value
will only intensify the prevalence of water politics and relevant
international conflicts.

Several countries depend heavily on river flows from other countries.
Botswana, Bulgaria, Cambodia, the Congo, Egypt, the Gambia, Hungary,
Luxembourg, Mauritania, the Netherlands, Romania, the Sudan and the Syrian
Arab Republic all receive over 75 percent of their available water supplies
from the river flows of upstream neighbours. More than 40 percent of the
world's population lives in river basins that are shared by more than one
country.

Along with land and energy sources, water has been the focus of disputes and,
in extreme cases, even wars. The division of the Indus waters and its
tributaries among India and Pakistan provided a salutary warning example. War
was only just avoided in the early years of independence by a binding
agreement, backed by massive international aid, to build two huge water
storage dams and a system of canals. Water could then be channelled to the
areas of Pakistan that were deprived of water when some of the Indus
tributaries were diverted into Indian territory.

The costs to all parties of this settlement were high but certainly less than
the human and financial costs of a conflict. Many other international rivers,
including the Nile, Euphrates, Ganges and Mekong, are prospective risk points
for disputes. The future of the Jordan waters is already an integral component
of regional peace talks and illustrates how complicated hydropolitics can be.
The fact that groundwater resources are also involved in the talks adds
another dimension of difficulty.

_BOX 10_  
**THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON WATER AND THE ENVIRONMENT: DEVELOPMENT ISSUES FOR THE 21 ST CENTURY**

The International Conference on Water and the Environment (ICWE) was held in
Dublin, Ireland, from 26 to 31 January 1992. The conference provided the major
input on freshwater problems for UNCED, convened in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
June 1992. The ICWE was attended by 500 participants from 114 countries, 38
NGOs, 14 intergovernmental organizations and 28 UN bodies and agencies.

The major work of the ICWE was undertaken by six working groups which
addressed:

> * integrated water resources development and management;

>

> * water resources assessment and impacts of climate change on water
resources;

>

> * protection of water resources, water quality and aquatic ecosystems;

>

> * water and sustainable urban development and drinking-water supply and
sanitation;

>

> * water for sustainable food production and rural development and drinking-
water supply and sanitation;

>

> * mechanisms for implementation and coordination at global, national,
regional and local levels.

The two main outputs of the conference are the Dublin Statement and Report of
the Conference, which set out recommendations for action based on four guiding
principles. First, the effective management of water resources demands a
holistic approach linking social and economic development with the protection
of natural ecosystems, including land and water linkages across catchment
areas or groundwater aquifers; second, water development and management should
be based on a participatory approach that involves users, planners and policy-
makers at all levels; third, women play a central part in the provision,
management and safeguarding of water; and, finally, water has an economic
value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.  
  
  
---  
  

##  The water sector and natural resource policy

In January 1992, the ICWE concluded that scarcity and misuse of freshwater
pose a serious and growing threat to sustainable development and protection of
the environment.15 The conference emphasized that human health and welfare,
food security, economic development and ecosystems are all at risk, unless
water and land resources are managed more effectively in the future.

> 15 _The Dublin Statement and Report of the Conference._ 1992\. ICWE, Dublin,
Ireland.

To address water problems at local, national and international levels, the
ICWE recommended a range of development strategies and policies based on four
principles (see Box 10). While the conference participants readily agreed on
the wording of the first three principles, the fourth provoked a long and
contentious debate. Principle 4 declares that water has an economic value in
all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.

For many, it is difficult to reconcile the concept of water as an economic
good with the traditional idea of water as a basic necessity and human right.
Older elementary economic textbooks explain this conceptual puzzle \- why
diamonds, which have so little utility, are expensive while freshwater, which
is so essential to life, is cheap. More recent texts leave water out of these
vignettes. Like fresh air, water was once considered a classic free good; now
that it is growing scarce, while not yet expensive, it is at least
acknowledged to be valuable.

Scarcity is one of the most important issues in considering the various socio-
economic tradeoffs in allocating water among different users. Allocation
policies and decisions determine who will have access to water and under what
conditions, and what impact this will have on society and the economy.

The cheapness of water is often more apparent than real. It is a free good not
because water provision is without cost - obviously this is far from true -
but because governments have chosen to charge less than full costs for water
services for one or more reasons.16 These subsidies are now coming under
scrutiny. The ICWE's final report acknowledges that failure in the past to
recognize water's economic value and the real cost of service provision has
led to wasteful and environmentally damaging uses. Moreover, the conference
report states that managing water as an economic good is an important way of
achieving efficient and equitable use, as well as encouraging the conservation
and protection of scarce water resources.

> 16 Water may be considered a "free" good in the form of rain, but when this
free good is captured and delivered to customers by canal, pipe or other
means, it becomes a water service. There is generally much less resistance to
water service fees than there is to water charges.

It is in this context that the ICWE and UNCED called for a new approach to the
assessment, development and management of freshwater resources. The proposed
approach involves the management of freshwater as a finite and vulnerable
resource and the integration of sectoral water plans and programmes within the
framework of national economic and social policy.17

> 17 UN. 1992. Protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources:
application of integrated approaches to the development, management and use of
water resources. Chapter 18, Agenda 21, _Report of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development._

_BOX 11_  
**FRAGMENTED PLANNING AND WATER RESOURCES IN SOUTHERN INDIA**

The World Bank's water resources management policy paper presents several
examples from southern India to illustrate the kinds of problem caused by
fragmented decision-making. The Chittur River's highly variable flows have
traditionally been diverted at many points into small reservoirs to irrigate
the main rice crop. The diversion channels are large enough to accommodate
flood flows following the monsoon rains. Thus, when a storage dam was
constructed, the uppermost channel was able to absorb virtually all the
regulated flow. The upper tanks now tend to remain full throughout the year,
concentrating benefits and adding to evaporation losses. The more extensive
lower areas have reverted to uncertain rain-fed cultivation, and total
agricultural value added has decreased. Construction of the storage dam
without adequate consideration of downstream users or the existing storage
capacity of the basin is one example of how individual project development in
isolation can cause significant economic losses.

The construction of the Sathanur Dam on the Ponnani River in Tamil Nadu to
serve a left bank command area deprived productive delta areas of irrigation
water. While the rights of downstream irrigators are recognized in the dam
operating rules, most of the regulated flow is diverted upstream; water losses
have greatly increased in the wide sandy bed and no surface water has reached
the sea for 20 or more years. Continued spills in about 50 percent of all
years were used to justify the subsequent construction of the right bank
command, further aggravating shortages in the delta and leading to continual
conflicts between the two Sathanur commands. Meanwhile, additional storage
dams on upstream tributaries are adding to evaporation losses in what was
already a fully developed basin. Irrigation in the productive delta has
declined further and the Sathanur commands in turn are suffering. The high-
value crops that were once grown on the main river are being replaced by
cultivation on less productive lands, served by tributaries that are more
variable than the main river.

The Amaravati River, a tributary of the Cauvery, is the most disputed major
river in India. In the absence of a Cauvery agreement, Karnataka (the upstream
riparian state) has steadily developed large irrigation schemes, depriving the
delta (Tamil Nadu's rice bowl) of its accustomed supplies. Meanwhile, Tamil
Nadu has been developing the Amaravati. As at Sathanur, water releases are
made from the Amaravati Dam for the traditional areas, but these are far
downstream and the substitution of regulated flood flows has encouraged the
development of private pumps along the river bank. Even though the new
electric connections have now been banned, little can be done to control
illegal connections or diesel pumps and, consequently, little water now
reaches the lowest commands, let alone the Cauvery. Meanwhile, new storage
dams are being constructed on tributaries both in Kerala and Tamil Nadu,
further depriving not only the old lands but also the new lands and the pump
areas.  
  
---  
  
> _Source: _World Bank. 1993.  
> _Water resources management: a policy paper._

A more integrated and broader approach to water sector polices and issues is
important because of water's special nature as a unitary resource. Rainwater,
rivers, lakes, groundwater and polluted water are all part of the same
resource, which means global, national, regional and local actions are highly
interdependent.18 Water use in one part of the system alters the resource base
and affects water users in other parts.

> 18 P. Rogers. 1992. _Comprehensive water resources management: a concept
paper. _Policy Research Working Paper. Washington, DC, World Bank.

Dams built in one country frequently reduce river flows to downstream
countries for years afterwards, thereby affecting hydroelectric and irrigation
capacity. When a city overpumps a groundwater supply, streamflows may be
reduced in surrounding areas; when it contaminates its surface water, it can
pollute groundwater supplies as well. Certain human actions at local levels
may contribute to climate change, with long-term implications for the
hydrological system worldwide.

Water policies, laws, projects, regulations and administrative actions often
overlook these linkages. Governments generally tend to organize and administer
water sector activities separately: one department is in charge of irrigation;
another oversees water supply and sanitation; a third manages hydropower
activities; a fourth supervises transportation; a fifth controls water
quality; a sixth directs environmental policy; and so forth.

These fragmented bureaucracies make uncoordinated decisions, reflecting
individual agency responsibilities that are independent of each other. Too
often, government planners develop the same water source within an
interdependent system for different and competing uses (see Box 11). This
project-by-project, department-by-department and region-by-region approach is
no longer adequate for addressing water issues.

To help resolve the growing number of water resource issues, policy-makers are
increasingly being called on to review and explain the conditions, problems
and progress in the overall water sector.

This integrated approach requires water managers to understand not only the
water cycle (including rainfall, distribution, ecosystem interactions and
natural environment and land-use changes), but also the diverse intersectoral
development needs for water resources.

The next section further explores this important concept of linking the water
sector with the national economy and provides a conceptual basis for
understanding the role of economic policy-making.

* * *

[![Previous Page](back.gif)](t0800e09.htm#TopOfPage) ![Top of Page](top.gif)
[![Next Page](next.gif)](t0800e0b.htm#TopOfPage)

