[![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo
/logo-wb-header-en.svg) ](http://www.worldbank.org/) [![The World Bank Working
for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-
en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)

Working for a World Free of Poverty

![menubartoggle](/content/dam/wbr/img/mobile-menu-lines.png)

  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
  * [__Connect](http://live.worldbank.org/connect)

  * [English__](http://www.worldbank.org) [EN__](http://www.worldbank.org)
    * [Español](http://www.bancomundial.org/)
    * [Français](http://www.banquemondiale.org/)
    * [عربي](http://www.albankaldawli.org/)
    * [Русский](http://www.worldbank.org/eca/russian/)
    * [中文](http://www.worldbank.org.cn/Chinese/)
    * [View All »](http://www.worldbank.org/languages)

[ ![#](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs/img/icon-search-black.png)
](javascript:submit_search_form\(\); "Search" )

[Search](javascript:submit_search_form_mobile\(\); "Search" )

  * [![Home](/content/dam/wbr/logo/home-icon.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [Home](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [About](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [Data](http://data.worldbank.org/)
  * [Research](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [Learning](http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/)
  * [News](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Projects & Operations](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Publications](http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/reference)
  * [Countries](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [Topics](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

[![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo
/logo-wb-header-en.svg) ](http://www.worldbank.org/) [![The World Bank Working
for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-
en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)

Working for a World Free of Poverty

  1. [News](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,pagePK:34382~piPK:34439~theSitePK:4607,00.html)

FEATURE STORY

# Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Bodies Restoration
Management Project

July 21, 2014

* * *

  * [ __Email ](javascript:MM_openBrWindow\(\);)
  * [ __Print ](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-irrigated-agriculture-modernization-and-water-bodies-restoration-management-project.print)

  * __Tweet
  * __Share
  * __Share
  *     * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-linkin32x32.svg)](javascript:share\('http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url='\);)

[LinkedIn
](javascript:share\('http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url='\);
"LinkedIn" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-digg.svg)](javascript:share\('http://digg.com/submit?url='\);)

[Digg ](javascript:share\('http://digg.com/submit?url='\); "Digg" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-renren.svg)](javascript:share\('http://share.renren.com/share/buttonshare.do?link='\);)

[人人网
](javascript:share\('http://share.renren.com/share/buttonshare.do?link='\);
"人人网" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-stumbleupon.svg)](javascript:share\('http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url='\);)

[Stumble Upon](javascript:share\('http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url='\);
"Stumble Upon" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-delicious.svg)](javascript:share\('http://delicious.com/save?url='\);)

[Delicious](javascript:share\('http://delicious.com/save?url='\); "Delicious"
)

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sina-32x32.svg)](javascript:share\('http://v.t.sina.com.cn/share/share.php?title='\);)

[新浪微博](javascript:share\('http://v.t.sina.com.cn/share/share.php?title='\);
"新浪微博" )

![Image](/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature
Story/sar/india/IN_Tamil_Nadu_Agriculture.jpg)

World Bank

* * *

**Approval Date:** 23 January 2007  
**Closing Date:** 30 September 2014  
**Commitment Amount:** $485 million  
**Percentage Disbursed:** 76% (As of 30 June 2014)

**_Context:_**

Problems associated with water availability in Tamil Nadu have become more
pronounced due to increasing demands from industry and households, as well as
a long-term uptrend in the use of water for agriculture. The Tamil Nadu
Irrigated Agriculture Modernization  and Water Bodies Restoration  and
Management Project supports the government of Tamil Nadu’s goal of improving
irrigation systems across the state to increase agricultural and livestock
productivity, and create market linkages for farmers. The government also
recognizes the need to develop and implement a comprehensive institutional
framework for efficient water management.

**_Project Development Objective:_**

The objective is for selected stakeholders (i.e. those in the watershed area
covered by the project) to increase irrigated agriculture productivity in a
sustainable water resources management framework. The project components are:

  * **_Irrigation Systems_****_ _****_Modernization_****_ _****_in_****_ a Sub-basin Framework: _**focuses on improvements in local water body’s irrigation and larger irrigation systems.
  * **_Agricultural_****_ _****_Intensification_****_ _****_and_****_ _****_Diversification:_****_ _**focuses on improvements in crop, livestock, and fisheries varieties and management practices, as well as improvements in marketing linkages for farmers.
  * **_Institutional_****_ _****_Modernization_****_ _****_for_****_ _****_Irrigated_****_ _****_Agriculture:_****_ _**focuses on capacity building for the Water Resources Organization and the establishment and operation of Water Users Associations.
  * **_Water_****_ Resources Management: _**focuses on establishing and operating a State Water Resources Management Agency as an apex body for water management issues for the state.

**_Location/Scale_****:**

The project covers 600,000 hectares in 63 selected sub-basins across the
state.  **__**

**_Status_****:**

  * The project is progressing well toward achieving its targets. Crop yields have increased anywhere from 18 to 32 percent, in line with the project target (25-30 percent).
  * Farmers have diversified from traditional crops such as paddy to higher-value horticultural crops (30 percent area increase).
  * New micro-irrigation systems, which cover over 37,000 hectares, have already been introduced against an end-of-project target of 40,000 ha.
  * Farmers’ incomes from agriculture have increased by roughly 35 percent, progressing well toward the intended target of 50 percent.
  * Planned targets for improved irrigation systems are being achieved in terms of area coverage, and the quality of these interventions has been above that prevailing outside the project.
  * The planned number of Water Users Associations has been established. A model for invigorating the WUAs through a broader program of community water budgeting has been tested successfully and is being expanded.
  * The project has successfully tested a model to integrate the activities of various line departments at the local level based on Single Window Information Centers, and this model is also being scaled up.
  * The State Water Resources Management Agency is established and serves as a hub for the state to deal more effectively with its water management issues.

* * *

* * *

* * *

###### RELATED

WORLD BANK

  * [ Status Report: World Bank Engagement in Tamil Nadu](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/status-report-world-bank-engagement-in-tamil-nadu)
  * [ Empowerment and Poverty Reduction Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-empowerment-and-poverty-reduction-project)
  * [ Health System Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-health-system-project)
  * [ Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-and-puducherry-coastal-disaster-risk-reduction-project)

EXTERNAL

  * [Dreams and Questions](http://blogs.worldbank.org/endpovertyinsouthasia/dreams-and-questions)
  * [World Bank India on Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/WorldBankIndia)
  * [World Bank India on Twitter](https://twitter.com/WBG_India)

* * *

###### MULTIMEDIA

![Image](/content/dam/Worldbank/Highlights%20&%20Features/sar/India/in-
slideshow-tamilnadu-field-visit.jpg) [__Video](/en/news/video/2014/06/19
/slideshow-impressions-from-a-field-visit-in-tamil-nadu)

VIDEO

##### [Slideshow: Impressions From a Field Visit in Tamil
Nadu](/en/news/video/2014/06/19/slideshow-impressions-from-a-field-visit-in-
tamil-nadu)

* * *

  * [India](/en/country/india)
  * [South Asia](/en/region/sar)
  * [Agriculture](/en/topic/agriculture)

* * *

###### LATEST NEWS

  * FEATURE STORY

##### [Unheard Voices: Men and Youth in Thailand’s Conflict-Affected Deep
South](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2016/09/21/men-and-youth-in-
thailands-conflict-affected-deep-south)

Sep 21, 2016

  * OPINION

##### [Uganda: Another Success Story Ten Years From
Now?](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/09/20/uganda-another-
success-story-ten-years-from-now)

Sep 20, 2016

  * PRESS RELEASE

##### [Agriculture Drives Uganda’s Success in Reducing
Poverty](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/09/20
/agriculture-drives-ugandas-success-in-reducing-poverty)

Sep 20, 2016

* * *

###### BLOGS

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/picture-10414-1422477561.jpg)

##### [ SDGs Made with Code: Giving young women the power to change the world
](http://blogs.worldbank.org/ic4d/sdgs-made-code-giving-young-women-power-
change-world)

Mariana Dahan

Sep 20, 2016

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/picture-11783-1474405220.jpg)

##### [ Moving from informal to formal sector and what it means for
policymakers ](http://blogs.worldbank.org/jobs/moving-informal-formal-sector-
and-what-it-means-policymakers)

Monami Dasgupta

Sep 20, 2016

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/260.jpeg)

##### [ The world’s top 100 economies: 31 countries; 69 corporations
](http://blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/world-s-top-100-economies-31-countries-69-corporations)

Duncan Green

Sep 20, 2016

* * *

###### Newsletters

[View All newsletters
»](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:23566264~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376~theSitePK:4607,00.html)

  * FOLLOW US

  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-youtube.svg)](https://www.youtube.com/user/WorldBank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-flickr.svg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank)

Newsletter

* * *

  * RESOURCES
  * [Civil Society](http://www.worldbank.org/civilsociety)
  * [Consultations](http://consultations.worldbank.org/)
  * [Government](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [Client Connection](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [Parliamentarians](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/parliamentarians)
  * [Access to Information](http://www.worldbank.org/en/access-to-information)
  * [Financing & Risk Management](http://treasury.worldbank.org/bdm/htm/index.html)
  * [Businesses](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [Corporate Procurement](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [Operational Procurement](http://www.worldbank.org/projectprocurement)
  * [Investors](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [World Bank Bonds](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [Job Seekers](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [Journalists](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Students](http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/youth)

  * [ABOUT](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [History](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/history)
  * [Organization](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership)
  * [Public Outreach](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/speakers-bureau)
  * [Events](http://www.worldbank.org/en/events)
  * [Jobs](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [Annual Reports](http://www.worldbank.org/annualreport)
  * World Bank Group Accountability 
  * [Compliance Advisor Ombudsman](http://www.cao-ombudsman.org/)
  * [Grievance Redress Service](http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service)
  * [Independent Evaluation Group](http://ieg.worldbank.org/)
  * [Inspection Panel](http://ewebapps.worldbank.org/apps/ip/Pages/Home.aspx)
  * [Integrity Vice Presidency](http://www.worldbank.org/integrity)
  * [Policies and Procedures](http://policies.worldbank.org/)

  * [Data](http://data.worldbank.org)
  * [DataBank](http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx)
  * [Data Catalog](http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog)
  * [Microdata](http://microdata.worldbank.org/)
  * [Data Publications & Products](http://data.worldbank.org/products)
  * [APIs for Developers](http://data.worldbank.org/developers)
  * [RESEARCH](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [Search Research](http://search.worldbank.org/research)
  * [Tools & Tables](http://econ.worldbank.org/datasets)
  * [LEARNING](http://www.worldbank.org/learning)
  * [Global Development Learning Network](http://gdln.org)
  * [Statistical Capacity Building](http://www.worldbank.org/en/data/statistical-capacity-building)
  * [Scholarships & Fellowships](http://www.worldbank.org/scholarships)

  * [NEWS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Search News](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/all)
  * [Blogs](http://blogs.worldbank.org/)
  * [Multimedia](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/multimedia)
  * [Media Briefing Center](http://media.worldbank.org)
  * [Media Contacts](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/contacts)
  * [PROJECTS & OPERATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Search Projects](http://search.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Products & Services](http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services)
  * [Country Lending](http://www.worldbank.org/countrylending)
  * [Results](http://www.worldbank.org/results)
  * [PUBLICATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/reference/?lang=en)
  * [Documents & Reports](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/home)
  * [Archives](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/archives)
  * [Libraries](http://jolis.worldbankimflib.org/external.htm)

  * [COUNTRIES](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [TOPICS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

* * *

    * FOLLOW US

    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-youtube.svg)](https://www.youtube.com/user/WorldBank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-flickr.svg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank)

    * Newsletter

    * More ways to get to us
    * [Sign Up for Email Newsletters](http://newsletters.worldbank.org/newsletters/list.htm)
    * [World Bank Apps](http://apps.worldbank.org/)
    * [World Bank Live](http://live.worldbank.org/)

  * RESOURCES
  * [ Civil Society](http://www.worldbank.org/civilsociety)
  * [ Consultations](http://consultations.worldbank.org/)
  * [ Government](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [ Businesses](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [ Investors](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [ Job Seekers](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [ Journalists](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [ Students](http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/youth)

  * [ ABOUT](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [ Data](http://data.worldbank.org)
  * [ RESEARCH](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [ LEARNING](http://www.worldbank.org/learning)
  * [ NEWS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [ PROJECTS & OPERATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [ PUBLICATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/reference/?lang=en)
  * [ COUNTRIES](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [ TOPICS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

  * [ ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [IBRD](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" )    [IDA](http://www.worldbank.org/ida "International Development Association" )    [IFC](http://www.ifc.org/ "International Finance Corporation" )    [MIGA](http://www.miga.org/ "Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" )    [ICSID](http://icsid.worldbank.org/ "International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes" )

  * [ ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [IBRD](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" )    [IDA](http://www.worldbank.org/ida "International Development Association" )    [IFC](http://www.ifc.org/ "International Finance Corporation" )    [MIGA](http://www.miga.org/ "Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" )    [ICSID](http://icsid.worldbank.org/ "International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes" )

[Legal](http://www.worldbank.org/legalinfo) | [Access to
Information](http://www.worldbank.org/wbaccess) |
[Jobs](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs) |
[Contact](http://www.worldbank.org/contacts)

©  The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.

[REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/integrity-
vice-presidency/report-an-allegation)

[REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/integrity-
vice-presidency/report-an-allegation)

Skip to content

  * [Journals](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journals)
  * [Books](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/bookbshsrw)

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

  * [Shopping cart](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74 "Shopping cart" )
  * __ Sign in
  * [ Help ](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=browse_open_doc.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fbrowse_open_doc.htm|SkinName=svs_SD "Help \(Opens new window\)" )

[ScienceDirect](/)

  * Sign in

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

    * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
    * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

  * [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

* Sign in
* [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

close

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

  * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
  * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

[ __Order Document
](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=DocumentDeliveryURL&_method=deliver&_orig=article&_rdoc=1&_eid=1-s2.0-S0169515097000042&_cid=271138&_issn=01695150&_pii=S0169515097000042&_zone=toolbar&md5=1986c52b30844d372dbcec957dd4d98c
"Order Document" )

Loading...

__ Export __

You have selected 1 citation for export.

[Help](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=art_export.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fart_export.htm|SkinName=svs_SD
"Help \(Opens new window\)" )

### Direct export

Save to Mendeley

[Save to RefWorks](/sdfe/export/S0169515097000042/refworks-tagged-format)

### Export file

#### Format

RIS (for EndNote, ReferenceManager, ProCite)

BibTeX

Text

#### Content

Citation Only

Citation and Abstract

Export

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

Close

This document does not have an outline.

JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all
the features on this page.

[Agricultural Economics](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150 "Go
to Agricultural Economics on ScienceDirect" )

[Volume 16, Issue
3](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3 "Go to table of
contents for this volume/issue" ), August 1997, Pages 185-192

[ ![Cover image](http://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/S01695150.gif)
](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3)

# Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: An analysis based on farm
size and ecological zone

Author links open the overlay panel. Numbers correspond to the affiliation
list which can be exposed by using the show more link.

Opens overlay Bedassa Tadesse ∗, a,
[JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG](mailto:JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG "author email" ),
Opens overlay S. Krishnamoorthy b

aDepartment of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Jimma College of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 307, Jimma, Ethiopia, IndiabDepartment of Agricultural
Economics, Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003, India

Accepted 18 March 1997, Available online 23 December 1997

Show more

### Choose an option to locate/access this article:

Check if you have access through your login credentials or your institution.

[Check
access](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169515097000042?_fmt=full
"Click to see if you have full text access" )

[ ![Get Full Text
Elsewhere](http://www.sciencedirect.com/scidirimg/gw_rtn_ihub.gif)
](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169515097000042?showall=true)

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

[doi:10.1016/S0169-5150(97)00004-2](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5150\(97\)00004-2
"Persistent link using digital object identifier" )

[Get rights and
content](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?publisherName=ELS&orderBeanReset=true&contentID=S0169515097000042
"Copyright Clearance Center \(new window\)" )

* * *

## Abstract

Despite the wider application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture,
little has been done on the investigation of intra and interecological
variations, size differences and their interactions. However, ecological
issues have paramount implications for the low-input sustainable agricultural
production. Furthermore, due to the various causes of efficiency, the age-old
size-based debate on efficiency differences is not yet resolved. The present
study examines the level of technical efficiency across ecological zones and
farm size groups in paddy farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
The study showed that 90% of the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms
in the state is due to differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power
and fertilisers have significant influence on the level of paddy production.
Varying from 0.59 to 0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83.
The use of _F_-test in two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored
regression (Tobit model), with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups
and their interactions, has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical
efficiency among paddy farms of the state differs significantly across agro-
ecological zones and size groups as well. The study further indicated that
small-sized paddy farms in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III
are represented by ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus
achieving higher technical efficiency.

* * *

open in overlay

    Corresponding author. Tel.: 002517110102, Fax: 002517110575

Copyright © 1997 Published by Elsevier B.V.

[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/)

[About ScienceDirect](http://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect)[Remote
access](/science/activateaccess)[Shopping
cart](/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74)[Contact
and support](/science/contactus)[Terms and
conditions](https://www.elsevier.com/legal/elsevier-website-terms-and-
conditions)[Privacy policy](http://www.elsevier.com/legal/privacy-policy)

Cookies are used by this site. For more information, visit the [cookies
page](https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect/support/cookies).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect
® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.

[RELX Group](http://www.relx.com/)

Close overlay

Close

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

# Other users also viewed these articles

![](http://cdn.els-cdn.com/sd/sci_dir/closeButton.png)

![Please wait...](//sdfestaticassets-us-
east-1.sciencedirectassets.com/prod/63172d2565d7c5115f2894922444490db0fadc2f/images/loader.gif)

Do not show again


Vision 2023 Œ Strategic Initiatives in Agriculture 
 Tamil Nadu envisages achieving 5.0 percent 
of annual average growth rate in Agricultural sector.
  
To achieve this, key initiatives to be taken under 

Vision 2023 are: 
 Promote market driven agricultural produce 
 Accelerating Innovation and Extension 

Mechanism 
 Functional consolidation of land holdings 
 Emphasis on mechanization 
 Improving Productivity 
 Assurance of timely irrigation 
 Creating a robust supply chain 
 Skill development in agriculture 
  The investment proposed the agriculture 

sector is Rs.40,000 Crores Œ Rs.16000 Crore for 

improving water resources, Rs.13000 Crore for agro-

processing and value addition and Rs.11000 Crore for
 
other projects (cold storages, grain storage 

complexes, perishable air cargo complex, gamma 

irradiation facility and terminal market complexes.   
  
  Source:   Vision 2023, Government of Tamil Nadu. 
  
     AGRICULTURE 
 CHAPTER 
 IV 
 Agriculture is the principal source of livelihood f
or more than 40 percent of the 
population of this State. Agriculture provides wage
 goods required by the non-agricultural 
sectors and raw materials for the industrial sector
. Ratcheting up the growth of the economy 
would be possible provided the agriculture sector f
ares well on a sustained basis.  A good 
performance of the agriculture 

sector is viewed as an effective 

instrument for attainment of 

inclusive economic growth and 

poverty reduction. The State 

achieved an all-time high record 

production of 10.1 million tonnes 

of foodgrains during 2011-12 

and received the Krishi Karman 

Award from the Government of 

India. Tamil Nadu performed 

well ahead of other major States 

in terms of productivity of 

important crops.  It ranked 

second in the productivity of 

paddy next only to Punjab and 

came first in the yield of maize 

and oilseeds. The productivity of 

sugarcane in Tamil Nadu was 

almost double of what was 

obtained at the national level. 

The better agricultural 

accomplishments are the result 

of continued technological gains 

and appropriate policies and timely 

intervention measures of the Government.  
 Unfortunately, the strong growth performance of 201
1-12 has been interrupted due to 
the severe drought conditions caused by a large rai
nfall deficit and the non-release of water 
in the Cauvery by Karnataka during 2012-13.  Growth
 in the agricultural sector has taken a 
big dip in 2012-13.  The State Government has stepp
ed in with the special relief packages for  
samba paddy to aid farmers in distress and to ensur
e an early recovery of agricultural 
production and productivity.     
 During the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), the State
 Department of Agriculture™s focus 
will continue to be on stabilizing foodgrain produc
tion so as to ensure food and nutrition 
security. It is planned to achieve the rate of grow
th of 5.0 percent in agricultural output. 
Further, it aims to increase the production to 170 
lakh tonnes in the case of foodgrains, 5 lakh 
bales of cotton, 545 lakh tonnes of cane and 17 lak
h tonnes of oilseeds.  The task is highly 
challenging. Therefore, the focus is to improve the
 yield rate per unit of land/ water. Apart 

Vision 2023 Œ Strategic Initiatives in Agriculture 
 Tamil Nadu envisages achieving 5.0 percent 
of annual average growth rate in Agricultural sector.
  
To achieve this, key initiatives to be taken under 

Vision 2023 are: 
 Promote market driven agricultural produce 
 Accelerating Innovation and Extension 

Mechanism 
 Functional consolidation of land holdings 
 Emphasis on mechanization 
 Improving Productivity 
 Assurance of timely irrigation 
 Creating a robust supply chain 
 Skill development in agriculture 
  The investment proposed the agriculture 

sector is Rs.40,000 Crores Œ Rs.16000 Crore for 

improving water resources, Rs.13000 Crore for agro-

processing and value addition and Rs.11000 Crore for
 
other projects (cold storages, grain storage 

complexes, perishable air cargo complex, gamma 

irradiation facility and terminal market complexes.   
  
  Source:   Vision 2023, Government of Tamil Nadu. 
  
     AGRICULTURE 
 CHAPTER 
 IV 
 Agriculture is the principal source of livelihood f
or more than 40 percent of the 
population of this State. Agriculture provides wage
 goods required by the non-agricultural 
sectors and raw materials for the industrial sector
. Ratcheting up the growth of the economy 
would be possible provided the agriculture sector f
ares well on a sustained basis.  A good 
performance of the agriculture 

sector is viewed as an effective 

instrument for attainment of 

inclusive economic growth and 

poverty reduction. The State 

achieved an all-time high record 

production of 10.1 million tonnes 

of foodgrains during 2011-12 

and received the Krishi Karman 

Award from the Government of 

India. Tamil Nadu performed 

well ahead of other major States 

in terms of productivity of 

important crops.  It ranked 

second in the productivity of 

paddy next only to Punjab and 

came first in the yield of maize 

and oilseeds. The productivity of 

sugarcane in Tamil Nadu was 

almost double of what was 

obtained at the national level. 

The better agricultural 

accomplishments are the result 

of continued technological gains 

and appropriate policies and timely 

intervention measures of the Government.  
 Unfortunately, the strong growth performance of 201
1-12 has been interrupted due to 
the severe drought conditions caused by a large rai
nfall deficit and the non-release of water 
in the Cauvery by Karnataka during 2012-13.  Growth
 in the agricultural sector has taken a 
big dip in 2012-13.  The State Government has stepp
ed in with the special relief packages for  
samba paddy to aid farmers in distress and to ensur
e an early recovery of agricultural 
production and productivity.     
 During the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), the State
 Department of Agriculture™s focus 
will continue to be on stabilizing foodgrain produc
tion so as to ensure food and nutrition 
security. It is planned to achieve the rate of grow
th of 5.0 percent in agricultural output. 
Further, it aims to increase the production to 170 
lakh tonnes in the case of foodgrains, 5 lakh 
bales of cotton, 545 lakh tonnes of cane and 17 lak
h tonnes of oilseeds.  The task is highly 
challenging. Therefore, the focus is to improve the
 yield rate per unit of land/ water. Apart 

from that, for attaining higher levels of productio
n, considerable importance is accorded to 
crop-specific strategies. New strategies are being 
evolved to break yield barriers, to utilize 
inputs more efficiently and diversify to more susta
inable and higher value crops. 
 In the above backdrop, the performance of the agric
ultural sector during 2011-12 and 
2012-13 is fully reviewed using the data available.
 For 2013-14, the prospects of the 
agricultural sector are based on the data available
, forecasts and projections made and target 
set.  
 4.1. Agriculture Prospects Œ 2013-14 
 The overall crop prospects in the State during 2013
 Œ 14 are encouraging.  During the 
current year the onset of the South-West Monsoon wa
s in time. The temporal spread of 
rainfall during this monsoon was by and large favou
rable for raising crops.  It was ‚excess™ in 
June and August and ‚normal™ in September. The spat
ial spread indicated that it was ‚normal™ 
in 17 districts, ‚excess™ in 7 districts, ‚deficit™
 in 6 districts and ‚scanty™ in 2 districts.  Thus,
 the 
spatial spread benefited 73.0 percent of the total 
geographical area of the State spread over 
24 districts.  The total quantum of rainfall receiv
ed  from this  season at 325.4 mm  was  rated  
as ‚normal™. The temporal and spatial 

spread of rainfall during this monsoon was 

also helpful in recharging the groundwater 

considerably. Apart from this, the monsoon 

brought copious inflows into the State™s 

surface flow sources and built up adequate  

storages. In tune with the requirements of 

the farmers, the release of water from the 

main reservoir viz., Mettur dam since 2
rd
 August 2013 was regulated in a systematic 

manner with adequate quantity. The 

release of water from other important 
reservoirs was also in accordance with the requirem
ents of the farmers. 
 The irrigation scenario in the State during the cur
rent year 2013 Œ 14 has turned out to 
be encouraging.  This resulted in an increase in th
e area under irrigated cropping in the 
State. Besides, the Government made fool-proof arra
ngements for the timely and adequate 
supply of all necessary inputs through Agricultural
 Extension Centres. The Co-operative 
Societies were geared up to provide adequate crop l
oans to the eligible farmers. The State 
Government provided uninterrupted 12 hours three ph
ase power supply to the delta districts 
and 8 hours for non-delta districts for encouraging
 the farmers to take up agricultural activities 
with sub-surface water.   All these efforts of the 
State were aimed to motivate the farmers and 
to redouble their efforts to take up agricultural a
ctivities with more vigour during the current 
year.  
 The intervention of North-East Monsoon during the y
ear was in time.  However, the 
rainfall received was in deficit during the entire 
season.  It was (-) 29.6 percent in October 
2013, (-) 33.7 percent in November 2013 and (-) 39.
3 percent in December 2013.  During this 
monsoon period, as against the normal level of 440.
4 mm, the actual rainfall received in the 
State was 294.3 mm (-33.2%).  The spatial spread al
so was uneven.  The uneven distribution 
of rainfall over time and space during the North-Ea
st Monsoon would have some adverse 
impact on the standing crops and crops grown mainly
 under rainfed conditions. The carry-
over storages in the surface flow sources that came
 from the South-West Monsoon were 
utilized.  As a result, it is hoped to bring in mor
e area under cultivation, area irrigated and to 
Table No. 4.1 Rainfall in Tamil Nadu (mm) 
Year 
South-
West 
Monsoon 
North-East 
Monsoon 
Annual 
Normal 
321.3 
440.4 
921.0 
2009-10 
317.0 
482.6 
937.8 
2010-11 
383.6 
605.2 
1165.1 
2011-12 
300.5 
540.8 
937.1 
2012-13 
245.9 
370.5 
743.1 
2013-14 325.4 294.3 -- 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai - 6
 
reduce current fallows to a considerable extent as 
compared to the level of 2012-13. All these 
factors would be conducive for the agricultural sec
tor to recover from the impact of drought 
witnessed in the previous year 2012-13 during 2013-
14. Ultimately, the overall cropping 
scenario in the State for the year is turning out t
o be encouraging.   
 With the favourable interplay of the above factors,
 the State forecasts to attain higher 
crop production during 2013-14 as compared to 2012-
13. This would be possible with an 
increase in the coverage of area under cropping as 
well as the yield of crops.  As per Second 
Advance Estimates for 2013-14 the expected rate of 
increase in the production of foodgrains 
would be from 56.05 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 to 85.46
 lakh tonnes in 2013-14 (53.0%), 
groundnut from 7.85 lakh tonnes to 9.90 lakh tonnes
 (26.0%), cotton from 2.55 lakh bales to 
3.18 lakh bales (25.0%) and sugarcane from 340.14 l
akh tonnes to 375.46 lakh tonnes  
(10.0%).  Ultimately the contribution of the agricu
ltural sector to Gross State Domestic 
Product (GSDP) is anticipated to register a higher 
order growth 8.22 per cent during the 
current year 2013-14 as against the 5.0 percent con
templated during the 12
th
 Five Year Plan.     
 4.2. Agricultural Performance during 2011 Œ 12 and 
2012 Œ 13: 
  The agricultural sector witnessed a severe drought
 impacting the area, yield and 
production of all important crops in the State duri
ng 2012 Œ 13.  This brought about a steep 
fall of 13.04 percent in the Gross State 

Domestic Product (GSDP) of the 

agricultural sub sector between 2011 Œ 

12 and 2012 - 13.  As a result, the 

relative share of the sub sector in the 

primary sector declined from 83.0 

percent in 2011 Œ 12 to 80.0 percent in 

2012 Œ 13 and in overall State™s GSDP 

from 7.4 percent to 6.2 percent.  
 The ‚deficit rainfall™ during the pre-monsoon perio
d viz., January 2012 Œ May 2012 (-) 
39.9 percent, South-West Monsoon period June 2012  
Œ September 2012  (-)24 percent and 
the  ‚uneven temporal spread™ of the northeast mons
oon (October +42.0%, November (-) 
54.0% & December (-) 62.0%), coupled with non-relea
se of Cauvery water for agricultural 
purposes by Karnataka State and depletion of ground
water level had its adverse impact on 
‚surface™ and ‚sub-surface™ water level during the 
year 2012 Œ 13. As against the total storage 
capacity of 198.384 tmcft in 15 major irrigation re
servoirs in the State, the live storage by the 
end of December 2012 was only 31.28 tmcft (16%). Th
e storage in these reservoirs in 2011 
was comfortably high at 68.0 percent and the live s
torage was 134.70 tmcft.  The average 
water levels in 1,261 observation wells maintained 
by
 Tamil Nadu Water Supply and 
Table No. 4.2   Trends in contribution of  
Agriculture Sector to GSDP 
(Rs. lakhs)
 Year GSDP Primary Sector Agriculture 
 2008-09 32179336 3079411 2509330 
2009-10 35663186 3279727 2673838 
2010-11 40341573 3516987 2879460 
2011-12 RE 43323803 3872767 3197598 
2012-13 QE 44794362 3477727 2780764 
RE- Revised Estimates,  QE- Quick Estimates 

Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai -6  
Table No. 4.3 Level of Depletion of Ground Water 
(Difference between 2012 and 2013) 
Higher than the State Average (Districts 
recording) 
Lower than the State Average(Districts recording) 
Ariyalur (5.9), Coimbatore (7.9), Dindigul (3.3), 

Erode (5.1), Madurai (7.5), Perambalur (6.7), 

Pudukkottai (2.3), Salem (4.3), Theni (7.7), 

Tirunelveli (5.3), Tiruppur (4.0), Thiruvarur (3.9)
, 
Tiruchirappalli (5.6) and Virudhunagar (2.3). 
Cuddalore (1.6), Dharmapuri (0.9), Kancheepuram (1.
6), 
Kanniyakumari (1.3), Karur (0.7), Krishnagiri (0.5)
, 
Nagapattinam (1.9), Namakkal (0.3), Ramanadhapuram 

(1.4), Sivagangai (1.0), Thanjavur (0.6), Tuticorin
 (0.9) 
and Thiruvannamalai (1.4). 
Note: 1. The ground water levels in  three district
s Viz., Vellore,Thiuvallur and Viluppuram did not 
experience any fall. 

2. Figures in brackets indicate the fall in the lev
el of ground water in meters. 
Source: Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board,
 Chennai Œ 5.  

Drainage (TWAD) Board throughout the State, experie
nced a fall in ground water table.  The 
average fall in the ground water level in the State
 between January 2012 and 2013 was from 
5.37 meters to 7.34 meters i.e., by 1.97 meters.   
 As against the normal rainfall of 921.0 mm, the tot
al quantum of rainfall received 
during the year 2012 Œ13 was 743.1 mm.  Eventhough 
it was rated as normal, the continuous 
long dry spell in the State, had its adverse impact
 on ‚surface™ and ‚sub-surface™ water caused 
‚drought™ affecting agricultural activities in the 
State. 
 The adverse effect of the 
drought got reflected in the 

reduction in gross area sown by 

12.7 percent, gross area irrigated 

by 15.0 percent and increase in 

fallows by 17.3 percent in 2012 Œ 13 

as compared to 2011 Œ 12.  The 

cropping intensity declined from 

118.1 percent in 2011-12 to 113.1 

percent in 2012-13 and that of 

irrigation intensity from 119.0 percent to 113.2 pe
rcent.   
  
Based on the report of the High Level Committee and
 taking into account the 
prevailing drought situation, in February 2013, the
 Government declared 31 districts of Tamil 
Nadu except Chennai as drought-affected and sanctio
ned various relief measures separately 
for delta and non-delta districts. Apart from this,
 a Drought Memorandum seeking assistance 
of Rs.19, 665.13 crore was sent to Government of In
dia.  
 4. 3. Land Holdings:       
            
A combination of factors such as
 i
ncreasing 
industrialization, urbanization, housing activities
 and 
infrastructure development triggered the conversion
 of 
agricultural land into non agricultural uses. This 
has 
resulted in a decline of the area under cultivation
. The 
scope for expansion of the area available for culti
vation is 
also very limited.  The pattern of land ownership i
mposes 
limitations on the models that can be adopted for 

agricultural development.  As per the latest Agricu
ltural 
Census 2010-11, marginal and small holdings   of
 less 
than 2 hectares accounted for 92.0 percent of the t
otal 
holdings and 61.0 percent of the total operated are
a. They in turn are unsuitable for 
conventional technology and machinery use to boost 
agricultural production. This led to a 
process of marginalization of small and marginal fa
rmers and casualization of agricultural 
labourers. To derive the best results and to empowe
r marginal and small farmers, they may 
be motivated to form farmers™ groups so as to get a
ll the technical inputs in time and to 
ensure judicious use of various scarce resources.
  The total number of operational land holdings in th
e State declined from 81.93 lakh in 
2005 Œ 06 to 81.18 lakh in 2010 Œ 11 (0.9%).  This 
implies that the farmers may have given 
up their cultivation because of the lucrative price
 offered for land on account of fast 
urbanization. This was more prevalent in the vicini
ty of urban areas.  Among the districts, the 
number of land holdings was the lowest in The Nilgi
ris (64,369) and the highest in 
Table No. 4.4  Land use pattern in Tamil Nadu 
(Lakh Hectares) 
Category 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
1. Fallows  
 (Current + Others) 
25.95 25.61 30.04 
2. Area sown: 

a. Net 

b. Gross 
 49.54 

57.53 
 49.86 

58.90 
 45.44 

51.40 
3. Area Irrigated: 

a. Net 

b. Gross 
 29.12 

33.48 
 29.64 

35.19 
 26.43 

29.91 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Chenn
ai-6. 
 
Villuppuram (6,15,543). Tamil Nadu™s share of the t
otal all-India operational holdings as per 
the 2010-11 Agricultural Census at 137.8 million wa
s 5.9 percent.  With continuous 
fragmentation of small (1 to 2 hectares), medium (2
 to 10 hectares) and large (10 hectares 
and above) holdings, the number of marginal holding
s increased in the State from 62.28 lakh 
to 62.66 lakh (0.6%) between the two Censuses. The 
share of marginal and small holdings in 
total holdings in the State rose from 91.1 percent 
to 91.7 percent. It was 85 percent at the all-
India level. 
 The total area operated also 
declined from 68.24 lakh hectares in 

2005 Œ 06 to 64.88 lakh hectares in 

2010 Œ 11 (4.9%).  Of the total area 

operated in all India at 159.2 million 

hectares, Tamil Nadu accounted for 4 

percent. The average size of land holding in the St
ate further reduced from 0.83 hectare in 
2005-06 to 0.80 hectare in 2010-11.  The average si
ze of land holding at the all-India level 
was comparatively higher at 1.16 hectare.    
 Among the districts as per the Agriculture Census 2
010-11, the average size of land 
holding was in the range of 0.22 hectare in Kanniya
kumari to 2.00 hectare in Tiruppur.  Out of 
31 districts, in as many as 18 districts the averag
e size of holdings was below the State™s 
average (0.80 hectare). The small size of land hold
ings inhibits investment in productivity-
enhancing measures and makes many agricultural hold
ings sub-optimal.   
 The average size of large holdings at 20.58 hectare
s in Tamil Nadu  was  higher than 
the all-India average size 17.38 hectares.  In Tami
l Nadu, the average size of marginal 
Table No.4.5 Distribution of Number of Holdings and
 Area Operated
 in Tamil Nadu as per Agriculture Census
 Category 
Number of holdings 
(lakhs) 
Area operated  
(lakh. ha.) 
Average size of holdings 
(ha.) 
2005-06 2010-11 2005-06 2010-11 2005-06 2010-11 
Marginal (< 1 hectare) 62.28 62.66 22.86 22.92 0.37
 0.37 
Small (1 to 2 hectare) 12.34 11.82 17.21 16.44 1.39
 1.39 
Medium ( 2 to 10 hectare) 7.12 6.53 24.26 22.03 3.4
1 3.37 
Big (> 10 hectare) 0.19 0.17 3.91 3.50 20.58 20.59 
Total 81.93 81.18 68.24 64.88 0.83 0.80 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Che
nnai Œ 6.  
Table No.4.6  Average size of Land Holding by Distr
icts 
District above the State 
level  
District below the State 
 level 
1. Tiruppur   2.00 1. Kancheepuram 0.66 
2. Coimbatore 1.81 2.Thiruvallur 0.59 
3. Karur 1.42 3.Vellore 0.65 
4. Erode 1.35 4. Thiruvannamalai 0.68 
5. The Nilgiris 1.25 5. Villupuram 0.67 
6. Thoothukudi 1.22 6.Cuddalore 0.72 
7. Dindigul 1.06 7. Thanjavur 0.72 
8. Theni 1.00 8. Dharmapuri 0.77 
9 .Virudhunagar 0.93 9. Tiruchirappalli 0.78 
10. Thiruvarur 0.92 10. Perambalur 0.75 
11. Namakkal 0.91 11. Pudukkottai 0.59 
12. Nagapattinam 0.86 12. Ramanadhapuram 0.72 
13. Salem 0.84 13. Sivagangai 0.62 
  14. Madurai 0.58 
  15. Tirunelveli 0.72 
  16. Kanniyakumari 0.22 
  17. Krishnagiri 0.80 
  18. Ariyalur 0.58 
State                             0.80 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai - 6 

holdings at 0.37 hectare, small holdings at 1.39 he
ctare and medium holdings at 3.37 hectare 
were somewhat smaller than that of all-India at 0.3
8 hectare, 1.42 hectare and 3.60 hectare 
respectively.    
 Of the total land holdings in State, institutional 
holdings accounted for a meagre share 
of 0.24 percent and in the total operated area its 
share was 2.05 percent. Among the districts, 
the number of institutional holdings ranged between
 63 in Salem and 2,583 in 
Kanniyakumari.   
 4.4. Performance of Principal Crops: 
 Achieving food security by increasing agricultural 
production forms the core of 
agricultural development strategy in the State. Thi
s policy assumes greater significance with 
the increasing population and accelerating economic
 growth.  A number of programmes have 
been launched for increasing production of agricult
ural commodities in the State at different 
points of time.  Thanks to the favourable temporal 
and spatial spread of rainfall and adequate 
availability of water both in surface and sub-surfa
ce flow for irrigation, the production of 
principal crops in the State witnessed increase  in
 2011-12 as compared to the previous year 
2010-11. The increase in production was mainly addu
ced to the increase in yield rate of 
crops rather than that of area.  In 2012-13, the si
tuation was entirely different.  The prolonged 
dry spell, the deficit rainfall during South-West M
onsoon, the uneven temporal spread during 
the North-East Monsoon and the decline in water ava
ilability in surface and sub-surface 
sources for irrigation produced adverse effect on c
ropped area and area irrigated.  On the 
other  hand, there was an increase in fallows cause
d by the wide spread drought.  The   area, 
yield and production of all crops in the State were
 affected during 2012-13.  The fall in yield 
was more pronounced than that of area.   
  During 2011-12, there was an all-time high producti
on of foodgrains at 101.52 lakh 
tonnes.  However, a wide spread drought during 2012
-13 triggered a steep decline in 
foodgrains production to 56.05 lakh tonnes (45.0%).
 The fall 
in the production of all constituents of foodgrains
 viz., rice, 
pulses and millets  caused the overall decline in f
oodgrains 
production during 2012-13. Among them the fall in r
ice 
production was much pronounced. In the case of prod
uction 
of rice, it fell from 74.59 lakh tonnes in 2011-12 
to 40.50 lakh 
tonnes in 2012-13 (46.0%). It was mainly due to the
 fall in 
yield rate of rice rather than the drop in area. Th
e area under 
paddy declined by 22.0 percent and that of yield by
 31.0 
percent  between these two years.  The per hectare 
yield rate 
Table No.4.7  Performance of Principal Crops in Tam
il Nadu 
Crops 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
# A Y P A Y P A Y P 
Paddy 19.04 3918 74.59 14.93 2712 40.50 18.49 3097 
57.26 
Millets  6.38 3643 23.24 6.42 2092 13.42 9.10 2747 
25.00 
Pulses 6.67 554 3.69 5.11 415 2.13 7.73 414 3.20 
Foodgrains 32.09 3164 101.52 26.46 2118 56.05 35.32
 2420 85.46 
Sugarcane
@ 3.46 113 389.75 3.48 98 340.14
 3.58 105 375.46 
Cotton* 1.36 481 3.82 1.33 326 2.55 1.50 361 3.18 
Oilseeds  4.49 2481 11.14 3.90 2092 8.16 4.61 2245 1
0.35 
Note: A Œ Area in lakh hectares; Y Œ Yield in kgs per
 hectare; P -  Production in lakh tonnes * in terms 
of lint; @ - in 
terms of cane          # - Forecast estimates.  

Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Che
nnai Œ 6
 
of paddy (in terms of rice)  at  3,918 kgs during t
he year 2011-12 was the best. In 2012-13 it 
declined to 2,712 kgs.  However, the yield rate of 
the crop  also  varied  within  the  State  as 
well as among  the  seasons  significantly.  Across
 the State the yield rate of paddy ranged 
between 588 kgs per hectare in Ramanathapuram and 4
728 kgs per hectare in 
kanniyakumari districts in 2012-13.  Among the seas
ons, the normal yield (average for the 5 
years ending 2011-12) obtained at 3,799 kgs per hec
tare in Kar/Kuruvai/Sornavari season 
was the highest as compared to 2,913 kgs in 

Samba/Thaladi/Pisanam and 3,552 kgs in 

Navarai/Kodai.  In the light of limited scope for 

expanding area under cultivation and under irrigati
on, 
the only way to meet the growing food requirement, 
 is to 
narrow down the vast gap in the yield rate among th
e 
districts as well as between the seasons. This call
s for 
the need for renewed research effort to narrow down
 the 
yield gap.  In 2013-14, it is anticipated to cover 
18.49 
lakh hectares under paddy and to produce 57.26 lakh
 
tonnes of rice. 
 Coarse cereals comprise crops like jowar, cumbu, ra
gi, maize and other small millets 
(korra , varagu, samai) which have traditionally be
en the main components of the food 
basket. These crops are being grown predominantly i
n rainfed conditions. Changing 
consumption pattern, non-adoption of the recommende
d doses of inputs due to high risk 
under rainfed agro-climatic conditions, non-availab
ility of high yielding variety quality seeds 
particularly of small millets, lack of assured proc
urement and poor resource base of the 
farmers who largely grow these crops are the limiti
ng factors in increasing the area and 
production of coarse cereals.  The total millets pr
oduction in the State dwindled from 23.24 
lakh tonnes in 2011-12 to 13.42 lakh tonnes in 2012
-13 (42.3%).  Eventhough the area 
increased by 0.6 percent between these two years, t
he fall in yield rate by 43.0 percent 
caused on overall decline in millets production. Wi
th the increase in the coverage to 9.10 lakh 
hectares during 2013-14, the total production of co
arse cereals is likely to go up to 25.0 lakh 
tonnes. 
  Being rich in protein, pulses not only form a vital
 part of the human diet, but also play 
a crucial role in balancing the dietary proteins. T
he major pulse crops grown are green gram 
(24.6%), black gram (46.2%) and horse gram (10.3%) 
which accounted for 81.1 percent of 
the total area under pulses in the State in 2011-12
. Cultivation of pulses is mostly (89.4% of 
the area) under rainfed condition on marginal lands
 with less fertile soil by resource-poor 
farmers.  The wide spread drought also affected the
 area, yield and production of pulses 
during 2012-13.  The decline in area was 23.4 perce
nt 
and in yield was 25.1 percent.  This caused a fall 
in 
pulses production in the State from 3.69 lakh tonne
s in 
2011-12 to 2.13 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 (42.3%).  Th
e 
average yield rate of pulses in the State even at i
ts peak 
at 554 kgs per hectare during 2011-12 was short of 
the 
all India average 694 kgs per hectare.  The total a
rea 
under pulses is likely to go up to 7.73 lakh hectar
es in 
2013-14 and the anticipated production is 3.20 lakh
 
tonnes. Non- availability of high yielding varietie
s, low 
Seed Replacement Rate (SRR), high susceptibility to
 
pests are the primary reasons for low yield of puls
es. To 

attain higher levels in yield rates focus needs  ex
pansion in area under micro irrigation, more 
use of micro nutrients, adoption of improved produc
tion practices and evolving better yielding 
seeds.  
 Sugarcane is the most important cash crop in the 
State which is widely cultivated in irrigated condi
tions. 
Despite drought, the crop™s coverage did not suffer
 during 
2012-13.  In fact, it increased from 3.46 lakh hect
ares in 
2011-12 to 3.48 lakh hectares in 2012-13 (0.6%).  F
ixing of 
a higher State Advised Price (SAP) by the State 

Government at Rs.2,350/- per tonne linked to 9.5 pe
rcent 
recovery rate in 2012-13 as compared to that of 

Government of India™s Statutory Minimum Price of Rs
. 
1,700/- per tonne and the increase in area register
ed with 
sugar mills under the crop from 2.75 lakh hectares 
in 2011-12 to 2.81 lakh hectares in 2012-
13 were responsible for enlarging the crop™s covera
ge. Contrary to this trend, the yield rate 
fell from 113 tonnes per hectare in 2011-12 to 98 t
onnes per hectare in 2012-13.  The fall in 
yield rate was responsible for the decline in cane 
production from 389.75 lakh tonnes in 
2011-12 to 340.14 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 (12.7%).  
The recovery rate of cane also declined 
from 9.35 to 8.68 percent between these two years. 
 This underlines the need for evolving 
new varieties having more sugar content.  The cane 
production during 2013-14 is likely to be 
of the order of 375.5 lakh tonnes.   The State Gove
rnment has increased the State Advised 
Price to Rs.2,650/- per tonne this year.   
 Highly as volatile cotton prices and high cost of p
est 
control are the two major factors that limit the ex
pansion of 
area under cotton in the State.  The area under thi
s crop 
marginally fell from 1.36 lakh hectares in 2011-12 
to 1.33 
lakh hectares in 2012-13 (2.2%) and the yield rate 
(lint) from 
481 kgs to 326 kgs (32.2%). They triggered the decl
ine in 
production from 3.82 lakh bales to 2.55 lakh bales 
(33.2%) 
of cotton in the State. During 2013-14 the coverage
 under 
the crop would be 1.50 lakh hectares and that of pr
oduction 
3.18 lakh bales. Developing cotton varieties suitab
le for 
increasing yield, especially, under rainfed conditi
ons, continuous follow up of pest monitoring 
and advisory services are some of the issues meriti
ng serious attention to increase the 
production and productivity of cotton in the State.
  
 Oilseeds cultivation is undertaken across the State
 
on marginal lands, dependent on monsoons with low l
evel 
of input usage.  Of the total area cultivated under
 oilseeds 
edible oilseeds accounted for 99.0 percent and rest
 being 
non-edible oilseeds.  The prominent oilseeds raised
 were 
groundnut, gingelly, castor and sunflower.  The tem
poral 
and spatial spread of rainfall during the year 2012
-13 was 
not beneficial to raising of oilseeds. Consequently
, the total 
area cultivated under these crops and the average y
ield 
rate declined from 4.49 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to
 3.90 
lakh hectares in 2012-13 (13.1%) and from 2,481 kgs
 to 
2,092 kgs (15.7%) per hectare respectively. This br
ought about a fall in the overall production 
of oilseeds in the State from 11.14 lakh tonnes to 
8.16 lakh tonnes (26.8%) between these 

two years. During 2013-14 the production would be o
f the order of 10.35 lakh tonnes. The 
following measures are needed to improve the area, 
yield and production of oilseeds: i) 
minimizing the wide inter-district variations in th
e yield level by adopting suitable package of 
practices and ii) evolving hybrids/high yielding va
rieties having more oil content but at the 
same time weathering the natural calamities and pes
t and diseases attack.   
 4.5  Horticulture: 
 In the context of increasing population, swelling u
rbanization and a favourable shift in 
consumption of fruits and vegetables, there is a ne
ed for covering larger areas under 
horticulture crops. Horticulture crops in Tamil Nad
u account for nearly 17 percent of the total 
cropped area. There has been a steady increase in t
he area covered under horticulture crops 
in the recent past.  The total area covered under h
orticulture crops in the  State  moved up 
from 10.01 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 10.81 lakh h
ectares in 2012-13 (8.0%) and would  
further  rise to 11.46  lakh hectares in 2013-14 (6
.0%).  Fruits, vegetables, spices and 
condiments and plantation crops together claimed a 
share of 96.0 percent of the total area 
covered under horticultural crops. The overall yiel
d rate exhibited a steady improvement.  The 
average yield rate of horticultural crops per hecta
re improved from 15.24 tonnes in 2011-12 
to 16.09 tonnes in 2012-13 (5.6%)  and  would furth
er  improve to  16.69  tonnes   in 2013-14 
(3.7%). The increase in area and yield rate helped 
to augment the total production of 
horticultural crops from 152.62 lakh tonnes in 2011
-12 to 173.99 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 
(14.0%) and further to 191.31 lakh tonnes in 2013-1
4 (10.0%).
  During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the State 
schemes viz., the Integrated Horticulture Developme
nt 
Schemes (IHDS) (Rs.28.59 crore), Integrated Tribal 

Development Programmes (ITDP) (Rs.2.0 crore), Weste
rn 
Ghats Development Programme (WGDP) and Hill Area 

Development Programme (HADP) (Rs. 12.40 crore) and 

National Agricultural Development Programme (NADP) 
(Rs. 
182.45 crore) were implemented.  The Centrally-Spon
sored 
Schemes like National Horticulture Mission (NHM) (R
s. 
479.01 crore), National Mission on Micro Irrigation
 (NMMI) 
(Rs. 256.01 crore), National Bamboo Mission (NBM) (
Rs. 
3.73 crore) and National Mission on Medicinal Plant
s (NMMP) (Rs. 27.30 crore) were also in 
operation.  The State also implemented the World Ba
nk assisted IAMWARM project (Rs. 72.0 
crore) for expansion of area with high value hortic
ultural crops in 61 sub-basins in Tamil 
Nadu.  Under precision farming, an extent of 22,294
 hectares was covered and 1,238 
Table No.4.8  Performance of Horticulture Crops in 
Tamil Nadu 
Crops 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
# A Y P A Y P A Y P 
Fruits  2.87 20.48 58.77 3.10 21.62 67.00 3.29 22.4
3 73.70 
Vegetables 2.54 27.25 69.27 2.74 28.77 78.96 2.90 2
9.95 86.79 
Spices & 

Condiments  
1.65 6.11 10.05 1.78 6.44 11.46 1.88 6.69 12.61 
Plantation Crops 2.55 4.12 10.50 2.75 4.34 11.97 2.
92 4.51 13.16 
Medicinal and 

aromatic crops 
0.14 9.20 1.29 0.15 9.73 1.48 0.16 9.91 1.62 
Flowers 0.26 10.35 2.74 0.29 10.92 3.12 0.31 11.12 
3.43 
Total Crops 10.01 15.24 152.62 10.81 16.09 173.99 1
1.46 16.69 191.31 
Note: A Œ Area in lakh hectares; Y Œ Yield in tonne  
per hectare; P -  Production in lakh tonnes 
# - Forecast estimates.   Source: Department of Hort
iculture and Plantation Crops,Chennai-5
 
clusters were established during 2008-11.  During t
he Eleventh Five Year Plan period, an 
area of 91,130 hectares was brought under micro irr
igation. All these schemes have gone a 
long way towards enhancing the production of hortic
ultural crops. 
 Even though many schemes are being implemented for 
the promotion of horticulture 
crops, yet the following impediments are still at w
ork: i) the perishable nature limits the  extent 
of market and transaction opportunities; ii) prices
 are highly volatile due to seasonal 
conditions;  iii) inadequate and timely availabilit
y of pedigree planting materials; iv) period of 
waiting is significantly long for those seeking qui
ck return and v) lack of technical guidance for 
increasing the productivity per unit of area due to
 weak extension machinery.  
 4.6  Trend in Overall Agricultural Production:  
 Index of Agricultural Production is the summary mea
sure which shows the pulse of 
the performance in agricultural sector. In view of 
the fact that the performance of the 
agricultural sector displays wide variations from y
ear to year, the trends in area, yield and 
production are analyzed during the 10
th
 (2002-03 to 2006-07) and 11
th
 (2007-08 to 2011-12) 
Five Year Plan  periods.  
  The overall agricultural production in the State h
ad gone up at an annual average 
growth rate of 7.29 percent during the 10
th
 Five Year plan period (2002-2007).This 
accomplishment is mainly due to the increase in yie
ld rate of crops.  There was an overall 
decline in area by 0.42 percent in this period. Dur
ing this Plan period, the production of food 
crops fared better than non-food crops. Turning to 
11
th
 Five Year Plan period (2007-2012), 
the overall agricultural production in the State de
clined by an annual average rate of 2.37 
percent.  The fall both in area 

and yield rate of crops was 

mainly responsible for this 

decline during the 11
th
 Plan 
period.  As between food and 

non-food crops, even though the 

latter registered a growth of 0.33 

percent, the decline in the 
production of food crops by an annual average 3.08 
percent engendered the fall in the overall 
agricultural production in the State.  In the case 
of food crops, both area and yield rate 
witnessed negative growth in this Plan period.  In 
respect of non-food crops, only the area 
under the crops registered a fall and the increase 
in yield rate of crops compensated the fall 
in area and contributed to the overall increase in 
production.  
 4.7  Yield Gap: 
 The yield gap is also a major issue 
that contributes to agricultural stagnation in 

the State.  There is considerable yield gap 

between on-farm trials and yield actually 

realized by the farmers.  Except paddy, 

there is significant yield gap in other crops.  

The yield gap is around 50.0 percent of the 

potential yield. This is because the 

adoption of agronomic practices has not 

been uniform and widespread. Agricultural 
Table No. 4.9 :  Index number of Area, Yield and Pr
oduction Œ 
Annual Average Growth Rate (%)  
 10
th
 Plan period 11
th
 Plan period 
Crops A Y P A Y P 
Food  0.17 5.11 7.94 (-)5.76 (-)2.65 (-)3.08 
Non-food 
  (-)2.31 6.15 5.96 (-)1.67 0.56 0.33 
All (-)0.42 5.24 7.29 (-)0.35 (-)1.96 (-)2.37 
Source: Compiled and Computed from the data received
 from the 
Department of Economics and Statistics Œ Chennai-6. 
Table No. 4.10   Yield Gap in Select Crops 
Crop 
Potential 
Yield 
(Kgs/ha.) 
Average Yield 
(Kgs/ha)  
(2011-12) 
Yield 
Gap 
(Kgs/ha.) 
Paddy 6000 3918 2082 
Red Gram 1500 870 630 
Black Gram 1270 580 690 
Sugarcane 146000 113000 33000 
Source: 1. Agriculture Development Strategy for Tam
il 
Nadu Œ 2004,   State Planning Commission ,   

Chennai Œ 5.  (page-22) 

2. Department of Economics and Statistics, Chennai 
- 6 

strategy has to focus attention towards bridging th
e gap between the potential yield and the 
actual yield realized.    
 4.8  Self-Reliance in Production: 
 The ICMR had estimated the per capita 
per day nutritional requirement of rice at 370 

grams and pulses at 70 grams.  Based on 

these norms the total requirement of these 

agricultural commodities for 2013-14 was 

worked out.  A comparison was made with the 

total estimated requirement and production.  

There was a shortfall between the requirement and t
he estimated production level of rice and 
pulses.  The gap was particularly significant in re
spect of pulses and illustrates that self 
sufficiency in food production in Tamil Nadu is som
e way off.     
 4.9  Loss of Agricultural Production due to Natural
 calamities:
  
  During 2011-12, a cyclone caused extensive damages
 to paddy, millets, pulses, 
sugarcane, groundnut and coconut in the districts o
f Cuddalore, Villupuram, Thanjavur, 
Nagapattinam, Thiruvarur, Kancheepuram, Thiruvallur
, Dharmapuri and Thiruvannamalai 
during the fag end of the North-East Monsoon period
. The total area affected was 1.88 lakh 
hectares and the total value of production loss amo
unted to Rs. 968.73 crore.  The relief 
measures were sanctioned to the level of Rs.174.24 
crore benefiting 2.91 lakh farmers.   
     Coupled with the prolonged dry 

spell since January 2012, the deficit 

rainfall during the South-West Monsoon 

and the uneven temporal and spatial 

spread of rainfall during the North-East 

Monsoon caused widespread drought in 

the State during 2012-13. The State 

Government declared 31 districts of Tamil 

Nadu except Chennai as drought affected 

and sanctioned various relief  measures  

to mitigate the sufferings of the farmers. In 

overall terms the total area and production 

affected by drought in the State during the 

year was estimated at 10.01 lakh hectares 

and 32.42 lakh tonnes respectively. The 

total value of loss of crop production was 

estimated at Rs. 3475.45 crore in the State. On an 
average, the loss of crop production per 
hectare worked out to Rs.34,719. In the case of foo
d crops, the total area affected by drought 
was 8.68 lakh hectares (86.7%) and production was 2
0.90 lakh tonnes (64.5%).  The total 
estimated value of loss of foodcrop production was 
Rs. 2770 crore (79.7%).  The total area 
affected under non food crops was 1.33 lakh hectare
s (13.3%).  The quantum of production 
under non-food crops affected by drought in the Sta
te was 11.52 lakh tonnes (35.5%) and the 
estimated loss of value was Rs.705 crore (20.3%). T
he State had sanctioned relief measures 
to the tune of Rs. 1,143 crore benefiting 20.33 lak
h farmers.  Of the total farmers benefited, 
those raising food crops accounted for 89.0 percent
 and the rest of the 11.0 percent were 
non-food crops cultivators.   
Table No. 4.11  Estimated ‚Requirement™ and 
‚Production™ of select Agricultural Commodities 
(As per II advanced Estimate)  
Commodities 
Estimated 
Requirement in a 
year (Lakh tonnes) 
Anticipated 
Production*  
(Lakh tonnes) 
2013-14 
Rice 
92.63 57.26 
Pulses 
10.01 3.20 
Source: * - Department of Economics and Statistics,
 
 Chennai -6 
Table No. 4.12  Loss of Agriculture Production due 
to 
Natural calamities and Relief measures provided 
Natural Calamities 
2011-12 
(Cyclone) 
2012-13 
(Drought) 
Area Affected (Lakh hectares) 
Food Crop 1.65 8.68 
Non-food crop 0.23 1.33 
Value of Crop loss (Rs. Crores)  
Food Crop 667.39 2770.48 
Non-food Crop 301.34 704.98 
Relief measures sanctioned 

 (Rs. crores) 
174.24 1143.26 
Farmers benefited (No. Lakhs ) 
Food Crop 2.55 18.07 
Non- food crop 0.36 2.26 
Area benefited (Lakh hectares) 
Food Crop 1.65 5.09 
Non-food crop 0.23 1.33 
Source:  Department of Agriculture, Chennai-5. 

4.10  Input Management: 
 Crop production is essentially a function of the in
terplay of natural resources such as 
land, water, soil, biodiversity with the plant gene
tic material i.e. use of quality seeds and use 
of other agricultural inputs like chemical fertiliz
ers, organic manure, pesticides, farm 
machinery and equipment, labour, credit and insuran
ce, pricing policy and marketing 
infrastructure. This section highlights the present
 status regarding the availability and access 
of agricultural inputs like seeds, fertilizers, pes
ticides, and credit which determine agricultural 
productivity and production.  
 4.10.1 Irrigation: 
  The annual per capita water availability in India 
is about 2200m
3 
whereas it is only 
about 750 m
3 
in Tamil Nadu. There are about 81 reservoirs, 41,12
7 tanks and 18.21 lakh 
wells in the State.  The total storage capacity of 

15 major reservoirs in the State is 198.38 tmcft.  

Against which water realization stood at 172.26 

tmcft in 2011-12 (86.8%).  Due to wide spread 

drought, water realization in the reservoirs in 

the State was restricted to 89.8 tmcft  in 2012-

13 (45.3%).  The decline in ground water table 

across the State is a matter of serious concern.  

As a result, out of 386 blocks in the State, 139 

blocks are categorized as over-exploited, 33 

blocks as critical, 67 blocks as semi-critical, 11 

blocks as poor quality and the balance 136 

blocks as safe.   
 The total net area irrigated in the State 
by all sources of irrigation declined from 29.64 

lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 26.43 lakh hectares 

in 2012-13 (10.8%).  There was a fall in gross 

area irrigated from 35.19 lakh hectares to 29.91 

lakh hectares (15.0%).  Canals accounted for 
22.0 percent, tanks for 16.0 percent and wells for 
62.0 percent. Eventhough the drought had 
its adverse effect on net area irrigated by differe
nt sources, it was more pronounced in the 
case of surface flow sources.  

It was 20.4 percent in the 

case of tanks and 20.9 

percent in respect of canals. 

The fall in net area irrigated 

by wells during 2012-13 was 

3.4 percent as compared to 

2011-12. The irrigation 

intensity in the State declined 

from 119.0 percent in 2011-12 

to 113.2 percent in 2012-13.   
 Water demand is increasing rapidly due to populatio
n growth, urbanization and 
changing lifestyle. Owing to increasing demand of w
ater for domestic, industrial and energy 
uses, there is a severe constraint in the availabil
ity of water for agriculture. Climate change 
Table No. 4.13 Water realization in Tamil Nadu
                   
(tmcft)
 Name of 
Reservoirs 
Actual 
Capacity 
 2011-12 2012-13 
Mettur 93470 87232 46897 
Bhavanisagar 32800 20942 6377 
Periyar 10570 6269 3361 
Sathanur 7321 6875 2342 
Vaigai 6091 5986 3460 
Manimuthar 5511 3657 3098 
Papanasam 5500 5304 2105 
Pechiparai 4450 4082 1256 
Amravathy 4047 4042 2049 
Perunchani 2890 2048 755 
Krishnagiri 1666 1580 1452 
Sholayar 5052 5298 5117 
Parambikulam 13408 13392 7391 
Aliyar 3864 3857 2592 
Thirumurthy 1744 1693 1555 
Total 198384 172257 89807 
Source: Chief Engineer,  Public Works Department, 

Chennai Œ 5.  
 Table No. 4.14 Net Area Irrigated  
(lakh hectares) 
Sources 2011-12 2012-13* 
Canals 7.46 5.90 
Tanks 5.28 4.20 
Wells 16.83 16.26 
Others 0.07 0.07 
Total 29.64 26.43 
Note - * Provisional, 

Source: Department of 

Economics and Statistics Œ 

Chennai-6. 

might complicate further the existing temporal and 
spatial variation in availability of water. 
Extreme events like floods and droughts are occurri
ng more frequently and affecting 
livelihood and food security. Low water use efficie
ncy and inadequate maintenance of 
irrigation systems are some of the major problems t
hat confront the management of water 
resources in the State. There is a need to promote 
participatory management of aquifers to 
ensure sustainable and equitable use of water. Prom
otion of micro-irrigation techniques, 
alignment of cropping patterns with the availabilit
y of water and greater involvement and 
empowerment of Water Users™ Associations in the com
mand areas could lead to 
improvement in water use efficiency.   
 With a view to improve the service delivery of the 
irrigation system and to increase the 
productivity with effective integrated water resour
ces management in a sub-basin frame work, 
a multi-sector  project Irrigated Agriculture Moder
nization and Water Bodies Restoration and 
Management Project (IAMWARM) with financial assista
nce of World Bank is being 
implemented in the State .  Between 2007-08 and 201
3-14, project rehabilitation works in 
4,549 tanks, 655 anaicuts and 8,018 k.m length of s
upply channels had been completed to 
benefit 6.69 lakh hectares with an expenditure of R
s.1,284 crores.  With the financial 
assistance of the Central and State Governments (50
:50), the Command Area Development 
Programme is currently being implemented in the Sta
te in Vaigai reservoir, Kodadanar 
reservoir, Varadhamanadhi reservoir, Kalingarayan a
naicut, Pelandurai anaicut, Cheyyur 
anaicut, Ellis anaicut and Manimutharu nadhi system
.  During 2012-13, on-farm development 
works were carried out to benefit 18,262 hectares a
t a cost of Rs.27.95 crore and Rotational 
Water Supply to benefit 18,267 hectares at a cost o
f Rs.0.60 crore. In 2013-14, on-farm 
development works are to be taken up to benefit an 
extent of area of 4,778 hectares at a total 
cost of Rs.38.83 crore under this programme.  Rotat
ional Water Supply works are also to be 
taken up to benefit 3,213 hectares at a cost of Rs.
0.78 crores. 
  Rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation str
uctures is taken up under the 
National Agriculture Development Programme.  For 20
12-13, out of 14 works accorded 
sanction at a cost of Rs. 9.21 crore, 7 works were 
completed.  The 13
th
 Finance Commission 
had recommended a grant of Rs. 200 crores for resto
ration of 674 traditional water bodies 
over a period of four years since 2011-12. During 2
012-13, 175 works were taken up at a 
cost Rs. 50 crore.  The Government has taken initia
tives to replenish the ground water 
potential through rain water harvesting and recharg
e structures.  Under Master Plan Artificial 
Recharge Scheme, the State had sanctioned Rs.550 cr
ores towards restoring the depleted 
aquifers through construction of check dams across 
rivers, streams, percolation ponds and 
recharge shafts.  Under the scheme, as against the 
target of 523 works, 429 works were 
completed at a total cost of Rs.199.66 crore up to 
2012-13.  The remaining 94 works at a cost 
of Rs. 65.45 crore are being taken up during the ye
ar 2013-14.  Under various schemes, 82 
percolation ponds at a cost of Rs.4.55 crore and fa
rm ponds numbering 320 were created at 
a cost of Rs.2.05 crore.   
 4.10.2 Seeds:    
 Quality seeds and planting materials are key 
agricultural inputs, which determine the productivi
ty of 
crops.  It is estimated that the quality of seed ac
counts 
for 20-25 percent of productivity. As a result of t
he 
adverse weather conditions, the quantum of supply o
f 
seeds in the State declined from 99,390 tonnes in 2
011-
12 to 73,033 tonnes in 2012-13.  In 2013-14 ( upto 
Feb 

2014), the supply of seeds  is 84,530 tonnes.  Howe
ver, as against the total estimated 
requirements, there was a persistent short fall in 
the supply of seeds by the organized sector 
(public and private) in the State. The short fall w
as conspicuous in respect of pulses, oil 
seeds and millets.  The organized sector had met on
ly 43 to 45 percent of the total seed 
requirements in the State. A larger portion of seed
 requirement i.e. about 57 to 55 percent 
continues to be met from the unorganized sector i.e
., mainly farm-saved seeds. Of the total 
quantum of seeds distributed by the organized secto
r during 2012-13, paddy alone 
accounted for 78.0 percent.  As against the stipula
ted seed replacement rate of 33.0 percent 
in respect of paddy, pulses and oilseeds and 50.0 p
ercent  for millets and cotton,  the actual 
rate fell short of in the case of pulses and oilsee
ds.  
 There is a need to develop better varieties/hybrids
/planting materials, which will be 
able to manifest itself even under challenging agro
-climatic conditions. The provision of 
subsidy for seeds for newer and older varieties nee
ds to be rationalized. The time is right to 
prepare a long term Seed Plan for the State keeping
 in mind the agro-climatic conditions, 
farmers™ requirements, SRR of the crops, State™s cr
op calendar and any contingent situations 
that may arise in order to ensure availability of q
uality seed at the right time to the farmers. In 
the absence of such a seed plan, farmers are forced
 to fall back on ‚farm-saved™ seeds or 
Truthfully Labelled Seeds.  Steps need to be taken 
to prepare a Seed Plan for 5 years. Seed 
Replacement needs the serious attention it deserves
.  
 4.10.3 Integrated Nutrient Management:
  
 Chemical fertilizers are the immediate source of nu
trients in the soils. In the State, a 
total number of 11,780 retail outlets effect fertil
izer distribution of which private retail outlets 
accounted for 63.0 percent and the rest being co-op
erative outlets. With the decline in 
cropped area as well as irrigated area consequent t
o the widespread drought, the total 
consumption of nitrogenous (N), 

phosphatic (P), potassic (K) fertilizers in 

the State declined to 13.74 lakh tonnes in 

2012-13 from 18.13 lakh tonnes in 2011-

12.  Eventhough, the three constituents 

witnessed a shortfall during 2012-13, it was 

much sharper in phosphatic (P) and 

potassic (K). In 2013-14, with the normal 

monsoon and increase in cropped as well 
as irrigated area, the total fertilizer consumption
 in the State would likely to go up to 13.88 
lakh tonnes.   
 The consumption of NPK in the State is found to be 
in the ratio of 4:1:1 in 2012-13 as 
against the conventionally accepted ratio of 4:2:1 
indicating imbalances in the application of 
three chemical nutrients.  Continuation of subsidy 
on urea while decontrolling phosphate and 
Table No. 4.15    Distribution of Seeds in Organize
d Sector  (Tonnes) 
Crop 
2011-12 2012-13 20013-14 (Upto Feb™ 2014) 
Require
- ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Require
--ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Require
-ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Paddy 110000 75250 68 78920 56716 72 100000 65000 6
5 
Millets 12153 6693 55 10637 5398 51 11733 8806 75 
Pulses 24000 4800 20 20800 4768 38 20800 4373 29 
Oilseeds 80612 12092 15 108186 5601 11 105638 5862 
13 
Cotton 555 555 100 550 550 100 555 489 88 
Total 227320 99390  219093 73033  238726 84530  
Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5. 
Table No. 4.16  Consumption of Chemical Fertilizers
 
    
                          in Tamil Nadu   
(lakh tonnes)
 Nutrients 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14* 
Nitrogenous 10.40 9.28 9.03 
Phosphorus  3.57 2.29 2.30 
Potash 4.16 2.17 2.55 
Total 18.13 13.74 13.88 
Per hectare (Kgs) 438 235 308 
Note: *- Anticipated 

Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5.
 
potash fertilizers further adds to the inadvertent 
promotion of imbalance in fertilizer use on the 
one hand and excessive use of nitrogenous fertilize
r on 
the other hand, leading to environmental pollution 
and 
lowering of profits to the farmers. The crop- wise 

consumption revealed that    paddy alone accounted 
for 
more than 50 percent of the total fertilizer consum
ption in 
the State.   
The average per hectare 
fertilizer consumption in the State 

declined from 438 kgs in 2011-12 

to 235 kgs in 2012-13.  In 2013-

14, it is expected to be  of the 

order of 308 kgs.  The all-India 

average consumption of fertilizers 

remained stable at 144 kgs per 

ha in 2011-12 when compared to 

the previous year. Very high 

variability was observed in 

fertilizer consumption among the 

districts.  Across the State, it was 

the highest in Madurai (669 Kgs) 

and lowest in Tiruppur (7 kg) 

districts in 2012-13.   
 The major constraints for adopting rational crop nu
trition schedules are (a) high cost
 of straight fertilizers of nutrients other than NPK
 and Zinc; (b) lack of strong policy support 
from the Government of India for balanced fertilize
r use and (c) lack of awareness among the 
farmers. 
 The Government is strictly monitoring the quality o
f the fertilizers through 14 Fertilizer 
Control Laboratories.  During 2012-13, a total of 1
6,540 samples were tested of which 436 
samples were found sub-standard.  It was programmed
 to analyze 17,500 fertilizer samples 
during 2013-14.   
  
 Micro nutrients are best applied through 

fortification of major fertilizers.  They have a 

significant impact on plant growth and life.  A 

total quantity of  1,626 tonnes of micro nutrients 

were produced in 2012-13 and  1,392 tonnes 

were supplied.  In 2013-14, it was programmed 

to produce 1,600 tonnes and to distribute entire 

quantity.  The crop -wise micro nutrient 

distribution during 2012-13 reveals that paddy 

accounted for 68.3 percent followed by coconut 

(10.6%), groundnut (6.6%) cotton and millets 

(4.4% each) and pulses (3.4%) and the rest being ot
her crops.  
Table No. 4. 17 : Per Hectare Fertilizer Consumptio
n (NPK)  
in 2012-13  (Kgs/ha) Provisional 
District above the State level  District below the 
State level 
1.  Madurai 669 1.  Thiruvarur 224 
2.  Tiruchirappalli  659 2.  Dindigul 220 
3.  Erode 519 3.  Sivagangai 214 
4.  Salem 514 4.  Karur 196 
5.  Theni 498 5.  Cuddalore  177 
6.  Kancheepuram 366 6.  Nagapattinam 175 
7.  Vellore 356 7.  Ariyalur 166 
8.  Tirunelveli 335 8.  Perambalur 157 
9.  Coimbatore  330 9.  Thoothukudi 112 
10.Pudukkottai 321 10. Dharmapuri 98 
11.Thiruvallur 313 11. Ramanadhapuram 88 
12.Thanjavur 272 12. Kanniyakumari 76 
13.Thiruvannamalai 251 13. Namakkal 66 
14. Villuppuram  246 14. The Nilgiris 55 
15.Virudhunagar 237 15. Krishnagiri 55 
  16. Tiruppur 7 
State 
235 
Source:  Compiled and Computed from the data obtain
ed from 
Department of Agriculture Œ Chennai-5 
Table No. 4.18    Distribution of Micro Nutrients 
(tonnes) 
Crop 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Paddy 736.4 950.2 906.7 
Groundnut 0.06 91.6 28.7 
Millets 258.7 61.3 45.5 
Cotton 1.00 61.6 11.8 
Coconut 85.3 147.7 121.9 
Pulses 13.5 46.9 20.5 
Others 758.9 32.5 6.8 
Total 1853.9 1391.8 1141.8 
Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5. 

A total quantity of 2,380 tonnes of bio-fertilizers
 was produced from the 15 centres out 
of which 2,180 tonnes were distributed to cover 4.8
8 lakh hectares benefitting 3.45 lakh 
farmers in 2012-13. In 2013-14, it is proposed to p
roduce and distribute 3,850 tonnes of bio-
fertilizers in the State.  
 Comprehensive and authentic database on micro nutri
ent/bio- fertilizer production and 
distribution in the State by public and private sec
tors needs to be built up for the benefit of all 
the stakeholders. With a view to ensure availabilit
y of true to type of micro nutrient/bio 
fertilizers to farmers; to curb sale of spurious an
d poor quality produce; to protect the rights of 
farmers; and to increase private participation in p
roduction and distribution, quality control 
needs to be enforced with utmost urgency on par wit
h international standards. 
 4.10.4 Integrated Pest Management: 
  The protection of crops from predations of pests a
nd diseases is a sine qua non for 
higher agricultural productivity, increased farm in
comes and enhanced food security for the 
nation.  Anecdotal evidence revealed that there is 
a production loss up to 30 percent due to 
incursion of pests and diseases. With the primary o
bjective of reducing the use of harmful 
pesticides and integrating as many non-chemical met
hods, Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) has been implemented in a cost-effective mann
er since late 1980s in the State.  It 
emphasizes promoting eco-friendly, bio-pesticide te
chnology at the field level.  Consequent to 
the implementation of IPM Technology and the fall i
n area cultivated, the technical grade 
material consumption in the State which was 10,926 
tonnes in 1984-85 drastically come 
down to 2,261 tonnes in 2011-12 and further to 2,20
7 tonnes in 2012-13.  Between these two 
years it is noteworthy that use of chemical pestici
des in the State declined from 385 grams 
per hectare to 375 grams per hectare.  Compared to 
the global average of 500 grams of 
technical grade pesticide per hectare it was on the
 low side.  The chemical pesticides are 
sold through 11,093 retail outlets of which 89.0 pe
rcent were in the private sector, 8.0 percent 
in the Government sector and 3.0 percent co-operati
ves.  Consequent to the decline in area 
cropped due to widespread drought, the total area t
reated under various plant protection 
measures had come down to 35.72 lakh hectares in 20
12-13 as against 38.30 lakh hectares 
in the previous year.  Of the total area treated, p
addy accounted for 42.0 percent followed by 
millets (19.0%), pulses (15.0%), sugarcane and grou
ndnut (10.0% each) and cotton (4.0%).    
 Certain special initiatives that can be taken up fo
r the effective implementation of IPM 
so as to produce safe and clean agricultural produc
e in a cost effective manner include: (a) 
training farmers on IPM Technology and educating th
em about the ill effects of indiscriminate 
use of pesticides; (b) encouraging the private sect
or to produce bio-pesticides; (c) regulating 
the sale of chemical pesticides and preventing misu
se; (d) developing indigenous and cost 
effective pheromones; and (e) ensuring availability
 of critical inputs  in right time.   
 4.10.5 Crop Insurance:  
 With a view to insulate the 
farmers against the loss occurred due 

to natural calamities, large scale 

outbreak of pests and diseases and 

to ensure credit worthiness for  the 

ensuing season,  the Agricultural  

Insurance Company of  India Limited   

implements  the National  Agricultural Insurance Sc
heme in the State.  The unit of insurance 
under the scheme is block depending on the area und
er the crop notified.  Under the 
Table No. 4.19    Crop Insurance 
Particulars 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Farmers Covered (Lakhs) 4.89 10.83 0.09 
Sum Insured (Rs. Crores) 1686 3402 0.46 
Area Covered  

(lakh Hectares) 
7.03 12.35 0.15 
Claims Paid (Rs  Crores)  40 744 -- 
Farmers Benefitted (Lakhs) 0.42 5.57 -- 
Source: Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limi
ted  
Chennai-1 

scheme, the total number of farmers insured their c
rops in the State increased from 4.89 
lakhs in 2011-12 to 10.83 lakhs in 2012-13.   The t
otal area insured under the scheme had 
gone up from 7.03 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 12.35
 lakh hectares in 2012-13 with the total 
sum insured at Rs.1,686 crores and Rs.3,402 crores 
respectively.  In 2013-14 (up to 
October), 0.15 lakh hectares were insured for a sum
 Rs.46 crores.  Of the total area covered, 
paddy, banana, black gram, sugarcane and maize toge
ther accounted for more than 90  
percent  in both  the years.  Claims to the tune of
 Rs.40 crore were paid to benefit 0.42 lakh 
farmers in 2011-12 and Rs. 744 crore to 5.57 lakh f
armers in 2012-13.  Research to evolve 
location specific insurance products and enhancing 
insurance education for the small and 
marginal farmers is the need of the hour.    
 The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme stipulat
es the premium level of 2.0 
percent to 3.5 percent of the sum insured.  Of this
, the State has extended 50 percent 
premium subsidy enabling the farmers only to pay 1.
0 percent to 1.75 percent of the sum 
insured. The Government of India has introduced a n
ew National Crop Insurance Scheme 
(NCIS) with two components ﬁModified National Agric
ultural Insurance Schemeﬂ and 
ﬁWeather Based Crop Insurance Schemeﬂ from Rabi 201
3-14 onwards by withdrawing  the 
National Agricultural Insurance Scheme. Under the n
ew Modified National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme which is implemented in all distri
cts from Rabi 2013-14, the premium 
payable by the farmers increases to 3.75 percent.  
With a view to encourage the farmers to 
adopt the agricultural crop insurance on a large sc
ale so as to enable them to mitigate the 
crop losses and continue their agricultural operati
ons in a sustainable manner, the State 
Government has made a strong plea to the Central Go
vernment to equally share the 
increased commitment on premium for the farmers ove
r and above 2.0 percent of the sum 
insured.   
 4.10.6 Institutional Credit: 
  Timely availability of credit 
at reasonable rates especially to 

small and marginal farmers is 

crucial for agricultural growth.  

Public sector banks, co-operative 

banks and regional rural banks 

play an important role in meeting 

the entire crop loans needs in the 

State.  Of the total credit disbursed 

by the above institutions, the share 

of the farm sector increased from 

53.7 percent in 2011-12 to 60.3 

percent in 2012-13. The quantum 

of crop loan disbursed in the State 

by these institutions steadily increased from Rs. 3
4,432 crore in 2011-12 to Rs. 51,991 crore 
in 2012-13 (51.0%).  It was planned to disburse cro
p loans to the tune of Rs. 48,657 crores in 
2013-14.  Of the total crop loan disbursed, paddy, 
plantation and horticulture crops together 
accounted for a sizable share of about 72.0 percent
 in both the years.  During 2012-13 in 
respect of paddy, oil seeds, turmeric, sugarcane an
d plantation and horticulture crops the 
disbursement of crop credit exceeded the respective
 targets. 
 A meagre 4.0 percent of the total institutional cre
dit for the farm sector had been 
utilized for infrastructure development viz., minor
 irrigation (Rs. 859 crore), land development 
Table No. 4.20 Disbursement of Institutional Crop L
oan  
(Rs crores) 
 Crops 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2013-14 
(Target) 
Target Achieve 
1. Crop Loan  
Paddy 8735 13456 15029 9602 
Millets 32 152 20 209 
Oil Seeds 3074 3859 5116 6649 
Pulses 178 299 127 413 
Cotton 413 601 405 763 
Tobacco 87 39 5 46 
Turmeric 2839 2745 3716 3786 
Sugarcane 3047 4358 4529 5485 
Horticulture crops* 16027 14323 23044 21704 
Total 34432 39832 51991 48657 
2. Total Farm Sector 37366 52326 58289 65647 
Total Institutional credit 
 69553 91325 96661 115076 
Note : * includes plantation 

Source: State Level Bankers™  Committee,  IOB, Chen
nai - 2 

(Rs.404 crore), farm mechanization (Rs.1,119 crore)
 and storage/market yard (Rs. 190 crore) 
in 2012-13.   
 Vast extent of agricultural lands is given on lease
 for small and marginal 
farmers/agricultural labourers due to migration of 
land owners, labour problems and other 
reasons.  These tenant farmers are not able to secu
re credit from banks and have to depend 
on informal sources of credit for taking up cultiva
tion.  There is need for bringing them into 
banking fold and facilitate provision of credit for
 farming operations.   
 4.10.7 Agriculture Marketing: 
 Owing to a number of factors such as inadequate sto
rage facilities, lack of quick and 
economical means of transportation, perishability o
f farm produce, poor withholding capacity 
of the farmers and urgent credit needs, the unorgan
ized sector comprising wholesale 
merchants, commission agents and other intermediari
es continue to dominate the sphere of 
agricultural marketing in the State.  With the 

aim to create infrastructure and to regulate 

agricultural produce trade activities, the State 

Government enacted the Tamil Nadu 

Agricultural Marketing (Regulation) Act 1987 

and Rules 1991 replacing the earlier Act of 

1959.   At present, 21 Marketing Committees 

are functioning at the district level.  Under their
 
control, 277 Regulated Markets are functioning 

in the State. Among them 66.0 percent 
transacted business of 5,000 metric tonnes per annu
m, 18.0 percent 2,000 to 5,000 mt of 
produce and 16.0 percent less than 2,000 mt per ann
um. The total number of licensed 
traders engaged in the transaction of agricultural 
produce in the regulated markets increased 
from 27,620 in 2011-12 to 28,253 in 2012-13.   Due 
to the wide spread drought, the total 
quantum of agricultural produce transacted in the r
egulated markets fell from 18.97 lakh 
tonnes in 2011-12 to 17.43 lakh tonnes in 2012-13. 
 With the prevailing favourable 
agricultural scenario in the State during 2013-14, 
it was programmed to transact 27.30 lakh 
tonnes.  The total value of agricultural commoditie
s transacted by these regulated markets 
during 2012-13 was Rs.3, 116 crore, of which food c
rops accounted for a major share of 68.0 
percent and the remaining being non-food crops.  Up
to the end of October 2013, the total 
value of transactions stood at Rs. 1,508 crore.  
  Grading of agricultural commodities has three main
 purposes, namely, (a) to promote 
common trade language and avoid the need for physic
al checking and handling at many 
points; (b) to protect consumers by ensuring qualit
y of product purchases; and (c) to protect 
the producer from exploitation by ensuring prices c
ommensurate to the quality of produce. 
Total quantum of agricultural produce graded in the
 State increased from 2.59 lakh tonnes in 
2011-12 to 3.0 lakh tonnes in 2012-13.   
 Market information is an important tool in the agri
cultural marketing system. 189 
regulated markets upload prevailing agricultural pr
oduce price and arrivals on an electronic 
portal on a daily basis.  Apart from this, 179 farm
ers™ markets had also disseminated price 
details.  To minimize the loss after harvest during
 drying, cleaning and winnowing, 1,359 
village level drying yards were constructed at a to
tal cost of Rs. 27.35 crore.   Four Agri 
Export Zones were established in the PPP mode at Ho
sur, Ooty, Nilakottai and Panruti to 
facilitate value addition for agricultural products
 and to minimize post-harvest losses. It 
ensures steady and better price  realization  to th
e farming community as well as availability 
Table No. 4.21
  
Value of Agricultural Produce 
Transacted through Regulated Markets 
(Rs. Crores)
 Commodities
 2012
-13
 2013
-14 * 
 Cereals 1670.50 653.24 
Pulses 117.20 55.71 
Other food crops 156.99 36.51 
Others 162.97 124.89 
Non food crops 1008.20 637.90 
Total 3115.88 1508.27 
Note: * Upto Oct™2013  

Source: Department of Agricultural Marketing and 

Agri-business, Chennai-32.   

of commodities in processed  form  to the  consumer
s throughout the year.   The total 
turnover of these zones during 2012-13 was Rs. 3.01
 crore.  
 In the co-operative fold, 110 Primary Co-
operative Marketing Societies transacted 

agricultural produce of a total value of Rs.552 

crore in 2012-13.  Up to October 2013, the total 

value of transaction was Rs. 163 crore.  Of the 

total value of transaction cotton alone accounted 

for a sizable share of 44.0 percent.  
 Food and agricultural commodity prices are 
primarily determined by domestic demand and 

supply factors.  Consequently, there is a wide gap 

between the prices received by the farmers and 

the prices paid by the consumer. At times, the farm
ers are not able to receive a price to cover 
the cost of production while the consumers are payi
ng an abnormally high price for the same 
commodity. This is a major concern for the policy m
akers. High food inflation with an 
inadequate supply response, aggravated by logistics
 and market-related constraints are other 
areas requiring attention. Further, to provide a hi
gher share of consumer prices to the 
farmers, there is a need to reduce the multiple lay
ers of intermediaries by providing 
alternative marketing channels.  Creation of scient
ific storages nearer to the farms is 
necessary so as to avoid wastage and produce deteri
oration. Enlarging the scope of 
provision of institutional credit to the farmers th
rough various instruments like pledge 
financing, so that they are not compelled to sell t
he produce at distress price is also 
necessary.  Supply of market information and extens
ion services to advise farmers on 
marketing, capacity-building in marketing; developm
ent of marketing linkages between 
farmers, agribusinesses and large retailers may be 
developed through cooperatives, contract 
farming or associations of stakeholders representin
g different interest groups like farmers, 
input suppliers, agricultural produce processers, e
tc.  
 4.11. Highlights of Major Schemes Implemented in th
e State: 
 The State has taken all efforts to increase agricul
tural production, enhance 
productivity and explore the untapped potential.  T
he Central Government also supplements 
the efforts of the State through implementation of 
Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector 
Schemes.    
 Development of wasteland/degraded land and improvin
g rainfed farming is crucial 
towards attaining self sufficiency in crop producti
on.  Towards achieving this goal, various 
area and location specific programmes viz., Drought
 Prone Area Programme (DPAP), 
Integrated Wasteland Development Programme (IWDP), 
Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP), National Watershed Development Pr
oject for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) 
are being implemented in the State over a period of
 time on watershed basis with the 
participatory approach. During 2012-13, the total a
rea treated under these programmes was 
1.47 lakh hectares at a cost of Rs. 186.13 crores. 
    With a view to improve the yield rate and product
ion of rice,  System of Rice 
Intensification (SRI) is being implemented in the S
tate.  During 2012-13, it had  adopted  the 
whole  village  concept in 1,719  villages covering
 an area of 1.68 lakh  hectares.  During 
2013-14, the scheme would be implemented in 2,000 v
illages covering an area of 1.90 lakh 
hectares.  
Tabl
e No. 4.22  Value of Agricultural Produce 
sold by Marketing Co-operative Societies 
 (Rs. Crores) 
Commodities 2012-13 
2013
-14
  ( upto Oct 2013) 
Foodgrains 20.14 3.35 
Cotton 241.95 30.01 
Spices 91.19 17.75 
Oilseeds 73.78 11.34 
Chilies 4.49 0.74 
Others 120.35 99.40 
Total 551.90 162.59 
Source: Registrar of Co-operative Marketing,  

Chennai -   10. 

To enhance the production of rice and pulses on mis
sion mode approach, the 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is implemente
d since 2007-08.  Under the scheme 
Rs.22.87 crores was spent during 2012-13 towards pr
omotion of rice in five districts viz., 
Thiruvarur, Nagapattinam, Sivagangai, Pudukkottai a
nd Ramanathapuram. Under this 
programme,  it was contemplated to improve pulses p
roduction in all districts except Chennai 
and The Nilgiris.  Various activities were taken up
 at a cost of Rs. 14.76 crores.   
 With the aim to increase productivity of oilseeds, 
pulses, oil palm and maize, the 
Integrated Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm an
d Maize (ISOPOM) is implemented since 
2004-05 with region specific strategies.  From 2010
-11 onwards, since pulses have been 
integrated with the NFSM, ISOPOM scheme was  implem
ented only for oilseeds, oil palm 
and maize at a cost of Rs.18.51 crores  during 2012
-13.   
 Under National Mission on Micro Irrigation, instill
ation of sprinkler irrigation for 
sugarcane, cotton, maize, pulses, groundnut and hor
ticultural crops is taken up.  During 
2012-13 this scheme has been implemented by Tamil N
adu Horticulture Development 
Agency (TANHODA) at a cost of Rs. 135.34 crores ben
efiting an area of 26,538 hectares.  It 
has been proposed to cover 47,800 hectare at an out
lay of Rs. 372.84 crores in 2013-14.  
Under the World Bank aided programme IAMWARM, crop 
demonstration, distribution of 
agricultural implements, farmers training and capac
ity building are being taken up at an 
outlay of Rs. 98.00 crore.  The total expenditure i
ncurred upto 2012-13 was Rs. 81.27 crores.  
   
With the success in achieving an increase of 30 Œ 5
0 percent in productivity due to 
adoption of high yielding/hybrid seeds, micro irrig
ation and fertigation in vegetables, turmeric, 
banana, precision farming is successfully implement
ed from 2008 onwards.  During 2012-13, 
at 50 percent subsidy, it was implemented at a cost
 of Rs. 9.25 crore benefiting 4,961 
hectares.   
 For promotion of horticulture in rainfed area, Rain
fed Area Development Programme 
(RADP) was implemented in 2,655 acres at a cost of 
Rs. 8.79 crores during 2012-13.  
  
Towards augmenting mechanization in agriculture und
er National Agricultural 
Development Programme (NADP) subsidy assistance to 
individual farmers for purchasing 
agricultural machinery so as to take up timely sowi
ng, transplanting, weeding, plant protection 
and harvesting and to overcome the acute farm worke
rs scarcity during 2012-13 total subsidy 
assistance of Rs. 73.45 crore was provided to the f
armers for purchasing 41,328 machineries 
for agriculture purposes.     
   
4.12. A Way Forward:  
  To meet the growing demand for agricultural produce
 and to ensure food security, the 
following measures are proposed:-  
  For achieving a farm output growth of 5 percent, i
ncremental productivity gains and 
technology diffusion are imperative.   
 Agriculture growth targeted in the Five Year Plans
 has often not been achieved due to 
high degree of uncertainty of the monsoon.  In this
 context, dry land farming, crop 
diversification and conservation of water through p
recision farming and waste land 
development are indispensible.   
 For nutritional security, special thrust is requir
ed for higher production and productivity 
level in pulses, oilseeds and fruits and vegetables
.  
 Sufficient public sector investment in agriculture
 sector is central to agricultural planning.  

 Ground water is still perceived as individual prop
erty and is exploited inequitably and 
without any consideration to sustainability.  It le
ads to over exploitation.  This needs to be 
properly regulated.   
 Existing resource infrastructure is not 
being properly maintained resulting in 

under utilization of available resources. 

Maintenance of existing water bodies 

may be assigned top most priority. Local 

bodies as well as stakeholders should be 

involved in the process.    
 Encroachment and diversion of water 
bodies must not be allowed and 

wherever it has taken place it should be 

restored to the extent feasible.   
 Water Users Associations should be 
given statutory power to collect and 

retain a portion of water charges and 

maintain the distribution system in their 

jurisdiction.    
 A higher proportion of farmers rely on farm-saved 
seeds leading to low seed replacement 
rate.  It is desirable to achieve the required and 
recommended seed replacement rate to 
accomplish higher production and productivity. 
 There is skewness in the application of chemical f
ertilizers (NPK).  There is overdose of 
nitrogenous and limited doses of phosphotic and pot
ash fertilizers application.  Farmers 
are to be educated enough to apply balanced applica
tion of fertilizers.  It required 
appropriate price incentives.   
 Cost-effective and productivity-enhancing System o
f Rice Intensification is to be 
implemented with efficacy and pragmatism. 
 Reforms in extension services are needed to ensure
 smooth transfer of agriculture 
technology and information to the farming communiti
es.    
 Exhaustion of yield potential of high yielding var
ieties in rice is to be overcome. 
 Post harvest value addition is to be improved and 
upgraded with adequate public 
investment.   
 Efficient markets with a dynamic supply chain is i
ndispensable for the development of the 
agricultural sector.   
 With respect to horticulture, marketing initiative
s are to be taken to promote modern 
terminal markets for fruits, vegetable and other pe
rishables in the important urban 
centres. The terminal markets will operate on a hub
-and-spoke format wherein the 
terminal markets are linked to a number of collecti
on centres located in key production 
centres to allow easy access to farmers for marketi
ng of their produce. 
 There are wide yield gaps across the State.  Agric
ulture production can be substantially 
increased if the yield gap will be addressed proper
ly through technological and policy 
intervention.   
 Awareness on crop insurance among the farmers may 
be enhanced.  
 To sum up, agriculture development is predicated by
 improvement in farm production 
and productivity, better utilization of agriculture
 inputs, proper marketing infrastructure and 
support, stepping up of investment in agriculture w
ith due regard and environmental concerns 
and efficient food management.   

  Strategies of Tamil Nadu Vision 2023 
 The Tamil Nadu Vision 2023 has a three pronged stra
tegies 
for improving productivity and thereby sustaining g
rowth in 
agriculture production so as to meet the growing de
mand for 
the agricultural produce and as well as ensuring fo
od security.  
The Strategies are: 
· Improving productivity by introducing scientific 

agricultural methods and building an institutional 

network to support the continued adoption of the sa
me. 
· Ensuring timely irrigation by intelligent use of ava
ilable 
water by adopting effective recharging mechanisms, 

drip/sprinkler irrigation systems, timely cleaning 
and 
deepening of tanks and canals, and adopting 

appropriate cropping pattern based on water 

availability. 
· Developing suitable post harvest infrastructure to 

maximize the benefits of value addition and timely 

marketing of produce.  The State will also extend 

agricultural extension activities to cover the enti
re 
farming community. 
 Source: Vision Tamil Nadu 2023, Government of  
Tamil Nadu,  (Page No.24) 
  
   Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development    Final Report     November 30,  2004 
    
   Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development    Final Report     November 30,  2004 
    ACRONYMS 
 AAY Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
MSP Minimum Support Price 
AP Andhra Pradesh NDDB National Dairy Development Board APL  Above poverty line 
NPC Nominal Protection Coefficient 
BPL Below poverty line NSS National Sample Survey 
DOA Department of Agriculture O&M Operation and Maintenance DPAP Drought Prone Area's Programme 
PCMS Primary Co-operative Marketing 
Societies GCA Gross Cropped Area PDS Public Distribution System 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
SGDP State Gross Domestic Product GFCF Gross Fixed Capital Formation TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System 
GoI Government of India T&V Training and Visitation 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
TNAU Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
FCI Food Corporation of India 
TNERC Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory 

Commission 
FMIS Farmer Management of Irrigation 
Systems 
WRO Water Resources Organization 
IMT Irrigation Management Transfer 
WUA Water Users' Association 
 Unit Measurements
       
 
   
 ft           feet 
Ha         hectare 
hp         horse power 
kg      kilogram 
 Kwh           kilowatt hour 
mt            metric ton 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Executive Summary..............................................................................................................
.........iv 1. Introduction...................................................................................................................
..........1 2. Overview.......................................................................................................................
..........6 Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu...........................................................................................
6 Major Crops....................................................................................................................
.............8 Output Price Incentives: Nominal Rates of Protection for Major Commodities.......................
13 Agricultural Inputs: Fertilizer Use and Mechanization.............................................................
14 Land...........................................................................................................................
................15 Livestock......................................................................................................................
.............17 Fisheries......................................................................................................................
...............18 The Rural Non-farm Sector......................................................................................................
.18 3. Water for Agriculture..........................................................................................................
..22 Water Resources................................................................................................................
........22 Overview of  Water Use in Agriculture.....................................................................................23 Rainfed Agriculture............................................................................................................
...24 Irrigated Agriculture..........................................................................................................
....26 Institutions...................................................................................................................
..............27 Water and Electricity Charges..................................................................................................
.29 Technology.....................................................................................................................
...........39 Environmental Management.....................................................................................................
40 4. Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension...................................................................
41 Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Irrigation....................................................................
41 Tamil Nadu™s Public Distribution System.................................................................................
43 Agricultural Extension...............................................................................................................45 5. Agricultural Markets and Market Policies.............................................................................50 Market Structure: Regulated and Private Markets....................................................................
50 Rice Markets...................................................................................................................
...........52 Markets for Sugar Cane and Milk.............................................................................................
56 Commodity Marketing Boards..................................................................................................
57 Contract Farming...............................................................................................................
........57 Rural Infrastructure...........................................................................................................
........58 6. Agricultural Growth and Rural Poverty................................................................................
60 Rural Poverty..................................................................................................................
...........60 Labor Markets..................................................................................................................
.........62 Technological Change and  Rural Poverty................................................................................
64 7. Conclusions and Policy Options............................................................................................
66 Increasing the Efficiency of Water Use.....................................................................................
66 Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension....................
70 Promoting the Development of Well Functioning Agricultural Markets..................................
71 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor.........................................................................
72 8. References.....................................................................................................................
........74  This report was prepared by a team led by Paul Dorosh and Mona Sur, with contributions from S.Rajagopal 
(water/irrigation), Jyoti Sriram (Bt Cotton),  C. Rama
samy  (Consultant, Tamil Nadu Agricultural Background 
Study), Burt Swanson (Consultant, agricultural research 
and extension), P.N. Mathur (Consultant,  agricultural 
research and extension).  Lili Liu, Dina Umali-Dein
inger and K. Palinisami (TNAU)  provided  valuable 
comments on various drafts.  Peer 
reviewers for the study are Derek Byerlee (Lead Economist, ARD), Peter 
Hazell (International Food Policy Research Institute) an
d S. Mahendra Dev (Centre for Economic and Social 
Studies, Hyderabad). 
 ii Table of Figures Figure 1.1:  Sectoral Contributions to GDP, 1980-2000.................................................................
1 Figure 2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu............................................................................
6 Figure 2.2:  Distribution of Gross Cropped Area by Crop..............................................................
8 Figure 2.3:  Irrigated Area by Crop (1999-2000)............................................................................
8 Figure 2.4:  Growth in Fisheries SGDP.........................................................................................
18 Figure 2.5:  Non-farm Income Share in Rural Tamil Nadu, 1993/94............................................
19 Figure 2.6:  Employment and Earnings 
in Khadi and Village Industries, 2000/01.......................
20 Figure 2.7:  Value Added in the Agro-Processing Sector by Industry..........................................
21 Figure 3.1:  Rainfall and Agricultural & Allied GSDP.................................................................
22 Figure 3.2:  Area Cultivated by 
Share of Irrigated Land Per Farm...............................................
24 Figure 3.3:  Net Irrigated Ar
ea by Source of Irrigation.................................................................
26 Figure 3.4:  Irrigation Costs for Rice Cultivation in India (Rs 1999-2000/ha).............................
40 Figure 3.5:  Irrigation Costs and Gross Profits for Rice Cultivation in India................................
40 Figure 4.1: Total Expenditures (Capital a
nd Revenue) on Agriculture and Irrigation..................
41 Figure 4.2:  Gross Fixed Capital 
Formation (GFCF) in Agriculture.............................................
42 Figure 5.1:  Rice Prices in Chennai 1994:  2003...........................................................................
54 Figure 6.1:  Productivity and Rural Poverty..................................................................................
61 Figure 6.2:  Real Paddy Prices and 
Rural Wage Rates in Tamil Nadu.........................................
63 Figure 7.1:  Alternatives for Public-Private Fi
nancing and Provision of Extension Services.......
71 Table of Tables Table 1.1:  Population, Labor Force and Ag
riculture in Tamil Nadu and Other States..................
2 Table 2.1:  Agro-climatic
 Zones of Tamil Nadu.............................................................................
7 Table 2.2:  Gross Area Cultivated and Cropping 
Patterns by Agro-ecological Zone   (2001-02)..
7 Table 2.3:  Area and Share of Gross Cropped Area (GCA) by Crop............................................
10 Table 2.4:   Growth rates of real
 Market Prices of Major Commodities.......................................
10 Table 2.5:  Tamil Nadu: Share of Area Cultivat
ed by Agro-ecological Zone for Major Crops....
11 Table 2.6:   Distribution of Gross Irrigated Area by Major Crops (1999-2000)...........................
11 Table 2.7:  Growth Rates in Area, 
Yields and Production:
 1980s and 1990s...............................
13 Table 2.8:  Nominal Protection Coefficients
 for Major Crops in 
Tamil Nadu, 1980-2002...........
14 Table 2.9:  Characteristics of Agriculture in Various States (1998)..............................................
15 Table 2.10:  Land Distributi
on in Tamil Nadu, 1995-96...............................................................
16 Table 2.11:  Employment by Major Agro-processing Industries, 1989/90-1996/97.....................
20 Table 2.12: Value Added in the Agro-processing 
Sector by Major Agro-processing Industries, 
1989/90-1997/98  (Rs Billion in constant 1993/94 Rupees).................................................
21 Table 3.1:  Rainfall in Tamil Nadu.............................................................................................
...23 Table 3.2:  Access to Irrigation by Farms.....................................................................................
24 Table 3.3:  Irrigation Expenditur
es and Revenues (1998/99-2000/01).........................................
30 Table 3.4:  Distribution of Canal Irrigati
on Subsidies in Tamil Nadu  (2001/02).........................
31 Table 3.5:  Distribution of Agricultural Power Subsidies in Tamil Nadu (2001/02)....................
32 Table 3.6:  Irrigation Costs by Crop and Type of Irrigation..........................................................
36 Table 3.7:  Financial and Economic Retu
rns by Crop and Type of Irrigation..............................
38 Table 3.8:  Estimated Input Subsidies fo
r Various Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2000-01......................
39 Table 4.1:  Breakdown of Expenditures on 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1997-2001).........
42 Table 4.2:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Costs of Rice Procurement....
46 Table 4.3:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Fiscal Costs of Rice Distribution
...............................................................................................................................................47  iiiTable 5.1:  Marketed Surplus and Market Cha
nnels of Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2001-02....
52 Table 5.2: Estimated Net Trade in Rice for Ta
mil Nadu (thousand tons), 1997/98 - 2002/03.....
53 Table 5.3:  Estimates of Marketing Channels 
for Major Crops (Percentage of Farm Sales)........
55 Table 6.1:  Poverty Estimates for Tamil Nadu  (1999/2000)........................................................
60 Table 6.2:  Farm Income Shares in Tamil Nadu............................................................................
62 Table 6.3:  Real rural wages in Tamil Nadu, 1986-2001..............................................................
63 Table 7.1:  Selected Country Experiences with Agricultural Subsidy Reform.............................
69 Table of Text Boxes Text Box 2.1:  Bt Cotton in Tamil Nadu ......................................................................................
12 Text Box 3.1:  Pro-poor Irri
gation Management Transfer............................................................
29 Text Box 4.1:  The ATMA Approach to Extension......................................................................
49 Text Box 5.1:  Contract farming in Tamil Nadu: New Initiatives for Rice...................................
59 Text Box 7.1:  Pilot Initiatives in Reforming Power Supply to Farmers......................................
68 Text Box 7.2:  Contract Farming in Punjab...................................................................................
72 Text Box 7.3:  Role of Government in Agro
-Food System and Agro-Enterprise Development..
73 Text Box 7.4:  Promoting the Rural non-farm
 Economy: Lessons from Latin America and the 
Caribbean......................................................................................................................
.........73  ivTAMIL NADU 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY Achievements and Challenges in Tamil Nadu Agriculture 
 (i) Agriculture in Tamil Nadu has enjoyed thre
e decades of growth based largely on 
rapid technological change. Food security has also increased due
 to rapid increases in food grain 
output, sales from the Public Distribution System (supplied by Food Corporation of India stocks), 
targeted feeding and employment programs, and we
ll-functioning rice markets that have enabled  
price-stabilizing inflows of rice from neighboring 
states in years of local production shortfalls. 
Partly because of agricultural growth, rural pove
rty rates declined from 38.5 percent to 24.3 
percent between 1993/94 and 1999/2000 (Deaton a
nd Drèze estimates). The state™s agriculture 
has a strong base for continued growth in term
s of a strong agricultural research system, an 
extensive road network, and a relatively well-educated rural labor force.  
(ii) While agricultural sector growth rates in Tamil Nadu were among the highest in 
India during the 1980s and early 1990s, decelerati
on in growth since the mid-1990s is of 
increasing concern to policymakers
. During the 1980s agricultural GSDP grew at 3.4 percent, 
exceeding the all-India agricultural growth of 2.9 
percent. Adequate rainfall contributed to even 
higher growth in the early 1990s: between 1989/90 
and 1994/95 agriculture grew by 7.2 percent 
in Tamil Nadu, compared with 3.1 percent in 
all of India. But between 1994/95 and 1999/2000 
agriculture in Tamil Nadu suffered from severe cons
ecutive droughts and grew only 1.3 percent a 
year, compared with 2.9 percent for all of India. 
As a result, the state™s agricultural growth rate 
during the 1990s was only 2.9 percent a year, compared with 3.2 percent for all of India.  
(iii) Faster growth in agriculture is central to rural development and poverty reduction 
in Tamil Nadu. Although agriculture accounts for only 15.7 percent of total GSDP, farm income 
accounts for about half of household income for 35 million people (56 percent of the state™s 
population) who live in rural areas. Much of this 
rural population is poor, with estimates ranging 
from 7.4 million people (20.6 percent of the rural 
population) to 11.4 million (31.8 percent of the 
rural population). For the poorest rural quintile 
(approximately 1.5 million households, or 7.5 
million people), more than three-quarters of income
 is derived from agriculture, with agricultural 
wage labor alone accounting for half of household income. Given the importance of agriculture in 
the incomes of the poor in Tamil Nadu, growth in
 labor-intensive agriculture could further reduce 
rural poverty through higher yields to small produ
cers, higher real wages to agricultural laborers, 
and increased income and employment opportunities with forward and backward links to the rural 

nonfarm sector.    
(iv) Traditional sources of growth in agricultu
re face major constraints such as growing 
water scarcity, increasing land degradation, dec
lining farm sizes, and rising costs of labor
. Tamil Nadu is one of the driest states in India, 
averaging only 925 millimeters of rainfall a year. 
The state™s dry season lasts five months (January through May) even in good years, and severe 
droughts occur in 3 of 10 years, severely lim
iting cultivation of crops between June and 
September. Per capita availability of water res
ources in Tamil Nadu is only 900 cubic meters a 
year, compared with 2,200 cubic meters for a
ll of India. Irrigation through a combination of 
canals, wells, and tanks
1 increases the reliability and availab
ility of water for farming and is 
                                                     
 1 A tank is a small-scale surface water reservoir constr
ucted on a gentle slope, designed so that water flows 
out of the tank through the force of gravity.  
 vessential for cultivating crops in much of the state.
 But the seasonality and scarcity of supply limit 
cultivation to only one crop per plot for most of the state.
2 The agricultural sector faces increasing 
competition for water from industry and domestic 
users and intensifying interstate competition 
for surface water resources. In many parts of the 
state, the rate of extraction of groundwater has 
exceeded recharge rates, contributing to falling 
water tables. Water quality is also a growing 
concern. Effluents discharged from industries and 
heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers have had 
a major impact on surface water quality, soils, and groundwater.   
(v) Agricultural land resources have also come
 under increasing pressure because of 
rapid population growth and urbanization
. Between 1971/72 and 1997/98 the available 
cultivable land per rural resident declined fro
m 0.22 hectares per capita to 0.15 hectares per 
capita. The growing pressures on land, skewed 
pricing policies, and rural poverty have all 
contributed to land and soil degradation. As a r
esult, poor soil fertility, salinity, water logging, 
overgrazing, and deforestation are growing pr
oblems and pose serious constraints to the 
performance of the agricultural sector
 in some parts of the state. (vi) Seasonal labor shortages and rising real agricultural wages during the past two 
decades, in part caused by rapid rural-urban migration, have contributed to higher incomes 
for agricultural laborers, but make future agric
ultural growth more difficult by reducing 
the competitiveness of Tamil Nadu™s agriculture vis-à-vis other agricultural producers
. Higher labor costs, due in part to rapid growth in demand for nonagricultural labor, have 
increased the cost of cultivation, especially fo
r labor-intensive crops. In 1999Œ2000 rural wages 
for male agricultural labor in the kharif season in
 Tamil Nadu averaged Rs.62.2 a day, compared 
with only Rs.45.3 a day in Andhra Pradesh and 
Rs.42.8 in Karnataka. These higher labor costs 
encourage mechanized land preparation and harves
ting, but small farm sizes constrain the rate of 
mechanization. 
(vii) Given the constraints, diversification 
into higher value, less water-intensive 
products, such as fruits, vegetables, spices, a
nd livestock products, may be one of the most 
promising sources of agricultural growth
. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions are well 
suited for diversified agricultu
re. Rapidly increasing incomes a
nd changing patterns of food 
demand also provide strong impetus for diversifi
cation. Increased agricultural diversification and private investments in processing for many of
 the higher value agricultural commodities are 
likely to generate new rural nonfarm employment
 opportunities and contribute to higher rural 
incomes.  (viii) Against this background this study assess
es agricultural policies in Tamil Nadu and 
the implications of these policies for future 
agricultural growth, food security, and rural 
poverty reduction, and recommends reform options
. This report focuses on selected critical 
issues rather than a comprehensive review of the 
agricultural sector in the 
state. It analyzes the 
structure of the agricultural economy, water ma
nagement, agricultural subsidies, agricultural 
marketing and regulations, and implications of 
policy reforms for food security and consumption 
of the poor.  

The Structure of Agriculture in Tamil Nadu 
(ix) Rice dominates both food consumption and agricultural production
, accounting for about a third of total gross cropped area and near
ly 60 percent of irrigated area in Tamil Nadu 
(over 90 percent of paddy is irrigated). Pul
ses (18 percent of total cropped area), millet (11 
percent), and groundnuts (10 percent) require less water than rice or sugar cane, and millet and 
pulses are grown almost exclusively on nonirrigated 
land. About 5 percent of total cropped area is 
                                                     
 2 In 1998/99 average cropping intensity was only 1.20 in Tamil Nadu, compared with 1.34 for all of India. 
 videvoted to sugar cane, all of it irrigated (acc
ounting for almost 10 percent of irrigated land). 
Cotton occupies about 3 percent of cropped area, and 
about a third of the cotton crop is irrigated.  
(x) The livestock and fisheries subsectors are also important in Tamil Nadu
. The state 
ranks second among Indian states in egg 
production and ninth in milk production.
3 In 2001/02 
Tamil Nadu accounted for approximately 6 percen
t of national milk production and 11.9 percent 
of egg production. The state is also relatively 
well endowed with fisheries, accounting for 13.2 
percent of total marine fish production and 4 percen
t of in-land fish production in India. In all, 
crop agriculture, livestock, and animal husbandry acc
ount for 92.2 percent of total value added in 
agriculture and allied activities, with fishing 
accounting for 4.5 percent and forestry for 3.3 percent. (xi) The average size of individually held farms is
 only 0.91 hectares, with over half the 
farms smaller than 0.5 hectares
. Nearly three-quarters of farms are smaller than 1 hectare, 
accounting for only 30.2 percent total cultivable land.
 In comparison, the average farm size in 
India is 1.41 hectares, with 62 percent 
of farmers holding less than 1 hectare. 
 
Water for Agriculture 
 (xii) Agriculture is the single largest consumer of
 water in the state, using 75 percent of 
the state™s water
. Despite limited water resources, Tamil Nadu has a high percentage of net sown 
area that is irrigated (54 percent). In 1999/2000 
the state had a net irrigated area of 3 million hectares. Today the state relies equally on surface 
and groundwater sources for irrigation, though 
its reliance on groundwater has been steadily in
creasing. Approximately 30 percent of the net 
irrigated area is watered by canals and 21 percent 
by tanks, while 49 percent is fed by wells. The 
remaining area is irrigated by other sources such as streams and springs. Rainfed agriculture, 
employing approximately 25 percent of farmers, accounts for 46 percent of the net sown area of 

5.5 million hectares. 
Institutional Issues 

(xiii) Institutional weaknesses have undermined 
proper management and development of 
water resources in the state
. As is common in many Indian states, inadequate priority to and 
funding for operations and maintenance led to ra
pid deterioration of surface irrigation. There was 
also minimal involvement of farmers in the opera
tions and maintenance of irrigation systems. But 
recent efforts have been made to address many
 of the issues plaguing the water sector.  
(xiv) The Government of Tamil Nadu is now undertaking 
comprehensive water planning on 
a river basin basis
 and has decentralized water resource management along river basins. In 1995 
the Public Works Department was divided into the 
Water Resources Organization
 (WRO) and 
the Buildings Organization. The WRO is to be fo
rmalized in 2004 as a separate agency with a 
specialized cadre of staff, with
 Chief Engineers reorganized around river basins. The Palar Basin 
Development and Management Board and th
e Thambaraparani Basin Development and 
Management Board were established in January 
of 2000. Preparation of macro-level basin 
development plans and formulation of deci
sion support systems for development and 
management of the water resources of the state have been under way since 1997. The state has 
drafted a Water Policy
, initiated steps for irrigation mana
gement transfer, and passed a 
Groundwater Regulation and Management Act, one of the first states in India to do so. The 
State Legislative Assembly passed the 
Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation 
                                                     
 3 Ranks are computed based on average production in Indian states between 1999 and 2001. 
 viiSystems Bill
 in May 2000. Substantial progress has been
 made in the environmental aspects of 
water resources development. 
(xv) Tamil Nadu has implemented a number of
 centrally sponsored and donor funded 
watershed development schemes to improve the 
production potential of rainfed agriculture
. The government recently launched the Comprehens
ive Wasteland Programme, which will cover 2 
million hectares through a watershe
d development project. Waters
hed projects in India have 
enjoyed relatively little success in curbing land degr
adation, improving the pr
oductivity of rainfed 
agriculture, and reducing rural poverty, and remain
 to be carefully evaluated in Tamil Nadu. 
 Economic Incentives for Water Use: Taxes and Implicit Subsidies  (xvi) Under the current system of economic incentive
s (prices, subsidies, taxes) the cost of 
water for farmers and other water users does 
not reflect the scarcity value (opportunity 
cost) of water. Throughout India, farmers using surface 
water for irrigation from canals or tanks 
are implicitly subsidized because water char
ges fall short of opera
tions and maintenance 
expenditures. Between 1990 and 2002 farmers usin
g groundwater for irrigation in Tamil Nadu 
also benefited from free agricultural power supply.
 Subsidizing irrigation water means that the 
environmental costs of water use are not bein
g internalized, reducing incentives for water 
conservation, encouraging the cultivation of 
water-intensive crops, and contributing to 
environmental degradation. The irrigation and ag
ricultural power subsidies have contributed to 
the state™s large fiscal deficit. These subsidies also 
have a high opportunity cost in terms of other 
social and economic expenditures foregone, 
and few poor directly benefit from them.  
(xvii) In 2002, the Government of Tamil Nadu 
announced increases in irrigation water charges and reintroduced a tariff for agricultural power consumers
. These reformsŠ
charging for water on a per area basis (as is the case for surface irrigation) or on a flat rate basis 
(for agricultural power consumers)Šwere a step in 
the right direction. But even these reforms did 
not result in economically efficient pricing, becau
se the marginal cost for water was almost zero 
and thus demand for irrigation water was not affected. 
(xviii) Prior to 2003, water charges were levied 
by the Government of Tamil Nadu at a 
base rate (which varied according to crop, season, and soil quality) plus an additional 
charge equivalent to six times the base rate
. This additional charge was transferred to the local 
panchayats. Beginning in July 2003, an additi
onal water charge of Rs.150 per hectare was 
imposed, de-linked from any additional cess. Thus, farmers were to pay the original charge plus 
the Rs.150 per hectare. In addition, the FMIS Ac
t empowered water user associations to charge 
users between Rs.250 and Rs.500 per hectare. This fee could be retained by the associations for 
operation and maintenance of the systems turned over to them. 
(xix) The agricultural power tariff introduced in 2003 included a flat rate for unmetered 
connections of Rs.250 per horsepower a year
 and Rs.0.20 per kilowatt-hour for metered 
connections. Along with the reintroduction of the agricultural power tariff, the government 
announced an income support scheme for smallholde
rs and marginal farmers. Under the income 
support scheme, the Government of Tamil Nadu 
was to provide smallholders and marginal 
farmers a transfer of up to Rs.1,250 a year. This
 was a significant step toward creating a more 
direct and transparent system of subsidies to 
farmers and other target groups and ensuring the 
separation of commercial operation of the power u
tility from the need for subsidy. However, the 
reintroduction of agriculture power tariff became
 a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu during 
the recent national election, forcing the governme
nt which suffered severe electoral loss for the 
national parliament seats to reverse the policy. 
 viii (xx) Nonetheless, the analysis in this report su
ggests that introduction of a flat rate 
charge of Rs.250 a year for a five horsepower pu
mpset would have only a small effect on net 
returns to land and management, reducin
g them by only 4.9 to 6.5 percent
. Costs of crop cultivation using well irrigation would rise by only
 Rs.625 per hectare (annual charge pro-rated 
for one season) to Rs.1,250 per hectare (for sugar cane grown over eleven months). 
(xxi) Raising electricity charges to the estimated 
marginal economic price of electricity to 
agriculture of Rs.3.1 per kilowatt-hour, thou
gh, would increase irrigation costs to about 
Rs.4,600 per hectare for paddy and sugar cane
, reducing returns to land and management 
by 35.9 percent for paddy  and by 23.8 percent for sugar cane
. Likewise, total returns to land, 
labor, and capital (value added) would fall sharply 
for paddy and sugar cane irrigated by wells if 
farmers bore the cost of electricity for pumping, strengthening the case for a compensating 
income support scheme in this scenario.   
Other Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Food 
 (xxii) Although public expenditures on agriculture in Tamil Nadu are high, the quality of 
expenditures is a cause for concern
. Expenditures on agriculture, 
allied activities, and irrigation as a share of agricultural GSDP are higher in Tami
l Nadu than in most major agricultural states in 
India (World Bank 2003). Between 1998 and 2000 pub
lic expenditures on agriculture equaled 11 
percent of total agricultural GSDP in Tamil Nadu,
 compared with 7.8 percent in all of India.
4 Public agricultural capital expenditures in the state are relatively low compared with the all-India 
average, while the opposite is true of revenue (i.e. 
current) expenditures  as a share of agricultural 
GSDP. This is a situation for concern since capita
l investments are important for future growth. 
Furthermore, a large share of revenue expenditu
res are incurred on staff salaries, and  food and 
irrigation subsidies, leaving operating expenses under funded. Gross fixed capital formation in 
agriculture increased by 15 percent during the 1
990s, due primarily to private capital formation, 
which accounted for 88 percent of gross fixed capital formation in agriculture.  
(xxiii) The agricultural extension system in Tamil Nadu is still organized around a 
modified Training and Visit approach and 
continues to focus on major food-grains. There is little coordination among line departments (agricultu
ral, animal husbandry, fisheries) in their 
extension approach. The extension system is sl
owly changing, however, and the promotion of 
public-private partnerships in extension is en
couraging. The Government of Tamil Nadu also 
plans to link agricultural, horticultural, and agri
cultural engineering extension systems and units 
to improve the extension capacity fo
r horticultural development.   
(xxiv) Reforms of the public procurement system and improvements in targeting are 
reducing state expenditures on food subsidies
. The Government of Tamil Nadu estimates that 
the food subsidy will fall from Rs
.15 billion in 2001/02 to Rs.7 
billion in 2003/04. Cessation of 
local procurement (except on behalf of the 
Food Corporation of India) reduced government 
expenditures on procurement by an estimated Rs.6
.8 billion by eliminating the costs of paying 
extra procurement incentives and of milling the pa
ddy into rice. Additional savings came from 
reducing the subsidy per kilogram of rice sold 
and the number of cards (and ultimately the sales 
of rice). The total estimated reduction in subsidy (from both reforms on procurement and 
                                                     
 4Agricultural public expenditures as a share of expend
itures on Economic Servi
ces and Agricultural GSDP 
are averages of data from 1998/99Œ2000/01. 
 ixdistribution) was about Rs.9.92 billion, with about
 two-thirds due to the cessation of Government 
of Tamil Nadu procurement on its own behalf. 
Development of Agricultural Markets 
 (xxv) In the past decade Tamil Nadu has in
creased private sector participation in 
marketing and eliminated government restrictions
. Unlike most Indian states, where 
wholesale marketing is restricted to regulated markets, Tamil Nadu permits traders to transact 
sales outside of regulated markets. Private market
s account for about 90 percent of the statewide 
trade in major crops. Regulated markets, in whic
h licensed traders bid for farmer produce through 
a tender system, account for only 10 percent.  
(xxvi) In May 2003, following the February 
2002 central Government order removing 
licensing restrictions on rice and 13 other crops, the state Government withdrew its 
licensing system for these crops
. Restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking, and sales of 
these commodities have been removed, though
 some provision remains for Government intervention in the case of high market prices for 
goods distributed through the public distribution 
system.  
(xxvii) Greater private sector participation in mark
ets has enhanced food security in Tamil 
Nadu. Increases in state production of major stap
les (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice 
through the public distribution system, school feeding programs, and targeted relief 
programs have increased access to food
. During the drought of 2002/03 the wholesale prices of 
rice only rose 2.8 percent in real terms above th
e previous year™s prices despite a 34 percent fall 
in paddy production in the state. This was 
because private sector inflows from neighboring 
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka and the availability 
of rice through the public distribution system 
helped to maintain access to food for poor consumers. 
(xxviii) Private investments in processing and marketing horticultural and export crops have 
enjoyed some success (for example, tumeric exports from Erode). Contract farming involving 
business agreements for the purchase of outputs and 
often the provision of inputs and extension advice is increasing, particularly for sugarcane, cotton, and horticultural crops.   Policy Reform Options in Tamil Nadu™s Agriculture 
 (xxix) Reducing rural poverty, accelerating growth in agricultural production, and 
overcoming the constraints faced by the agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu require 
appropriate policies and investments in four priority areas
: improving the efficiency of water 
use, increasing the effectiveness of public expend
itures and agricultural extension, spurring the 
development of agricultural markets, and maximizi
ng the real income growth of the rural poor.  
 Improving the Efficiency of Water Use 
 (xxx) Long-term growth in agriculture and rural 
incomes depends in large part on using 
water efficiently
. Water management options include scaling up the pilot river basin framework 
for managing water resources holistically, allowi
ng interagency coordina
tion and public-private 
partnerships; introducing specific, legally enfor
ceable water entitlements to various users in a 
river basin and or aquifer framework; adjusting el
ectricity, water, and crop prices to change the 
 xfinancial incentives for irrigation and crop choice; and improving management practices and 
irrigation technologies (such as drip and sprinkler
 irrigation) and investing in canals and water 
storage (coupled with improved operation and maintenance). 
 (xxxi) Public administration in the water sect
or could be improved by separating 
responsibilities for water resource man
agement and irrigation service delivery
. Tamil Nadu 
is the only state in India without a separate departme
nt of irrigation, now a 
part of the Department of Public Works. Two new agencies are needed: a 
regulatory agency to allocate the share of water 
resources to agriculture, industry, and other uses,
 and an irrigation department focusing on irrigation delivery systems. A separate irrigati
on department would allow for the creation of a 
specialized cadre of irrigation specialists, instead
 of the current setup that relies on staff from the 
Department of Public Works (which also includes administration of public buildings).  

(xxxii) Irrigation management transfer is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and water user 
associations are not yet fully functional
. The transfer of irrigation management to farmers in 
line with the FMIS Act should be expedited to
 make water distribution more efficient and equitable.  
(xxxiii) Providing the right economic incentives (pric
es, subsidies, taxes) that recognize the 
opportunity cost of water is essential
 for improving water use efficiency. Raising electricity 
charges to the estimated marginal economic price 
of electricity to agriculture of Rs.3.1 per 
kilowatt-hour may not be politically feasible, but moving gradually toward marginal cost pricing 
(perhaps combined with compensation to farmers 
in the form of income transfers or a more 
reliable electricity supply) would help rationa
lize water use in Tamil Nadu. Paying greater 
attention to market infrastructure, strengthening
 research and extension to meet the needs of 
diversified agriculture, developing tools for fa
rmers to better manage 
risks, and improving 
irrigation pumpset efficiency are likely to make hi
gher power charges more palatable to farmers.  
If farmers™ costs and incomes varied according to 
the amount of electricity (and water) used with 
well irrigation, they would have an incentive to
 shift some land from water-intensive crops (rice 
and sugar cane) toward less water-intensive crops
 (including cotton, maize, and vegetables).  
(xxxiv) Increases in electricity charges would have
 little effect on overall rice production 
and market prices but a major effect on sugar cane production
. Since only about 10 percent 
of rice area cultivated is irrigated with well 
water (about 200 thousand hectares), changes in 
electricity pricing would have only marginal eff
ects on production. And since rice is also supplied 
by net public distribution (averaging 1.2 million t
ons a year from 1997/98 to 2001/02, 18 percent 
of net production) and private market trade from 
neighboring states (estimated at 1.0Œ1.3 million 
tons in the drought year 2002/03), the effect of
 lower rice production from well  irrigated areas on 
market prices of rice would likely be small.
 Impacts on sugar cane production would be much 
greater, however, as essentially all sugar cane is irrigated in part with well water.  
(xxxv) The current provisions for irrigation wat
er charges allow full cost recovery of required operations and maintenance expenditures
. The extent to which farmers are actually 
being charged the proposed water rates remains unclear.  

(xxxvi) Greater attention is also needed for 
modernizing irrigation infrastructure and 
scaling up the adoption of water saving irrigation technologies. While the use of sprinkler and 
drip technology has been promoted in the stat
e, the high capital cost of these technologies 
constrains widespread adoption by smallholde
rs and marginal farmers. More affordable 
technology or a suitable system of targeted subs
idies should be developed to increase the use of 
sprinkler and drip systems. 
 xi(xxxvii) Past experience reveals that extensive community participation with sound technical 
inputs are necessary for successful watershed programs. 
A basin perspective should be adopted 
to ensure that these initiatives do not have
 negative impacts on downstream human and 
ecological uses.   Increasing the effectiveness of public 
expenditures and agricultural extension  (xxxviii) Responding to the needs of diversified
 agriculture requires a highly effective 
research and agricultural extension system
. An assessment of the state™s comparative 
advantage in producing higher value crops for the 
domestic and export markets would also help 
in setting future research and development prioriti
es.  Re-orienting agricultural research to make 
it more farmer-responsive would likewise improve the output of a system that has enjoyed much 
success in rice technology development in the past. 
Similarly, the current extension system in the 
state remains organized around a modified Training and Visit approach and continues to be 
highly focused on major food-grains, though the pr
omotion of public-private partnerships in 
extension is a very encouraging recent  devel
opment and offers potential for both cost-savings 
and greater efficiency. Thus, it is recommende
d that the GoTN develop a new agricultural 
extension strategy to meet the changing needs 
of farmers. This could include adopting an 
integrated and decentralized extension system th
at could help build farmer organizations that 
could link with private firms to increase economic growth in rural areas.   
(xxxix) Rationalizing public expenditures and shi
fting expenditures from subsidies to 
investments in key public goods such rural 
roads, markets and agricultural research and 
extension will facilitate productivity improve
ments and diversification of agriculture to higher value products
. Tightening competition for limited fiscal resources heightens the urgency 
of appropriate public expenditure reallocati
on. Institutional reforms within government 
departments to ensure improved quality of deliver
y of rural-related public goods and services is 
also important.
 Promoting the development of well 
functioning agricultural markets  (xl) Well functioning agricultural markets are al
so important for successful agricultural 
diversification. If recent policy reforms removing restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking 
and sales of paddy and 13 other crops are consisten
tly implemented at the local level, they can be 
expected to improve marketing efficiency
, reducing the margin between producer and 
consumer/export prices. Reductions in marketing 
costs are also necessary in order for production 
increases to lead to higher agricu
ltural incomes, particularly for perishable high-value products 
(e.g. fruits, vegetables, animal products). Contr
act farming and other private sector initiatives 
should be encouraged, though the impact of
 these business arrangements on farmer incomes 
should be evaluated, as well . 
(xli) There remain, however, important roles for the public sector in promoting agro-
food system and agro-enterprise development
  In addition to policies that establish ﬁrules of 
the gameﬂ and address market failures, public i
nvestments in rural roads to strengthen rural 
connectivity can contribute to reduced costs 
of marketing.  Although Tamil Nadu has an 
extensive road network, further attention to ma
intenance and upgrading of rural roads in some 
regions may be warranted.  Given the rapidly cha
nging nature of markets in Tamil Nadu, an in-
depth study of market structure and investment needs would be useful.   
 xii(xlii) Increasing agricultural diversification will not compromise Tamil Nadu™s food 
security objectives given an effective PDS , we
ll-functioning markets and targeted nutrition 
programs
.  Greater food security has largely been 
achieved through increases in state production of major staples (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice through the PDS, school feeding 
programs, and targeted relief programs during droughts. During the recent drought of  2002/03 
the wholesale prices of rice only rose 2.8 percent (in real terms) above the previous year™s price, 

despite a 34 percent fall in paddy production in th
e state, helping to maintain access to food for 
poor consumers. This was largely due to privat
e sector inflows from neighboring states of Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka and the ava
ilability of rice through the PDS. 
 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor 
 (xliii) Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor
.  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops 
remains an important unresolved issue, however.  Contract farming may help overcome these 

problems, if competition between firms helps farmers 
maintain their share of the value of the final 
product sales.  The experience of Latin America 
and the Caribbean suggests that education, 
transport infrastructure, and engines of non-farm
 growth that promote female employment are 
key aspects of a success strategy to promote non-farm growth and rural poverty reduction. 
(xliv) Whether agricultural diversification reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new 
technologies and have access to markets, the 
magnitude of employment and real wage rate gains, and the size of linkage effects with 
rural non-agriculture. The implications of an agricultura
l diversification strategy involving 
higher risk crops and capital-intensive technologies (drip irrigation) must be assessed. This 
assessment should review crop and drought insu
rance instruments, and the potential for 
innovations in these instruments to enable rural fa
rmers, particularly poor farmers, to better 
manage risks.   10100200300400500600
700
800
9001980-811982-83
1984-851986-871988-89
1990-91
1992-93
1994-951996-97
1998-99
2000-01Rs. Billion
 (Constant 1993-94 Rupees)Agriculture and allied 
Industry 
Services 
TAMIL NADU 
AGRICULTURAL DEVEL0PMENT
 1. Introduction  1.1 The agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu has a 
long history of notable achievements 
and significant progress.  Construction of the Grand Anicut (dam) on the Cauvery river in the 
second century AD permitted a large expansion of
 irrigated area and rice cultivation, and a 
flourishing of the Chola kingdom.  Centuries 
later, rapid expansion of green revolution 
technology (improved seeds, increased fertilizer use,
 and irrigation) enabled the state to increase 
average rice yields by 74.4 percent between 
the trienniums ending 1972/73 and 2001/02, enabling 
production to increase by 36.2 percent in spite of 
a 21.9 percent decrease in
 area cultivated with rice.   1.2 While agricultural sector growth rates in Tamil Nadu were among the highest in 
India during the 1980s and early 1990s, decelerati
on in growth since the mid-1990s is of 
increasing concern to policymakers
. During the 1980s agricultural GSDP grew at 3.4 percent, 
exceeding the all-India agricultural growth of 2.9 
percent. Adequate rainfall contributed to even 
higher growth in the early 1990s: between 1989/90 
and 1994/95 agriculture grew by 7.2 percent 
in Tamil Nadu, compared with 3.1 percent in 
all of India. But between 1994/95 and 1999/2000 
agriculture in Tamil Nadu suffered from severe cons
ecutive droughts and grew only 1.3 percent a 
year, compared with 2.9 percent for all of India. 
As a result, the state™s agricultural growth rate 
during the 1990s was only 2.9 percent a year, compared with 3.2 percent for all of India. 

1.3 In contrast to the uneven growth in agriculture, the non-agricultural economy of 
Tamil Nadu has expanded rapidly, leading to a sh
arp decline in the share of agriculture in total output (
Figure  1.1).  The agricultural and allied services 
(livestock, forestry and fisheries) 
sector™s contribution to GSDP has declined fro
m 24.3 percent in 1980/81 to 15.7 percent in 
2001/02, one of the lowest shares in the country. By comparison, between 1980/81 and 2001/02 
the services sectors share of GSDP increased from 
40.7 percent to 51.5 percent, while the share of 
industry decreased slightly, from 35 percent to 32.8 percent. 
Figure  1.1:  Sectoral Contributions to GDP, 1980-2000 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 Source:  World Bank States Database
 21.4 Despite its declining importance in th
e overall economy, however, agriculture remains a major source of employmen
t and earnings for the rural poor.  About  56 percent 
of the state™s population of 62 million (2001 Census) 
resides in rural areas and close to half (14.4 
million workers) of an estimated 29 million workers are employed in agriculture (
Table  1.1).  For 
the poorest rural quintile (approximately 1.5 milli
on households with about 7.5 million people), 
more than three-quarters of income continues to
 be derived from agriculture, with agriculture 
wage labor alone accounting for half of house
hold income. Agricultural labor accounts for 49.5 
percent of the labor force in the state, less than the all-India average of 59.2 percent.  Unlike most 
of India (with the exception of Andhra Pradesh), 
agricultural laborers outnumber cultivators by a 
1.69:1 ratio (compared with a 0.88:1 ration across 
India), further highlighting the importance of 
returns to labor for poverty reduction.    
 Table  1.1:  Population, Labor Force and Ag
riculture in Tamil Nadu and Other States 
  Andhra Pr.MaharashtraPunjab 
KarnatakaTamil Nadu  All India 
Population (2000 census)        
  Total (mns) 75.796.824.352.762.1  1027.0
  Rural (mns) 55.255.716.034.834.9  741.7

  Urban (mns) 20.541.08.217.927.2  285.4
  % rural 72.9%57.6%66
.1%66.0%56.1%  72.2%
        
Labor force in agriculture        
  as percentage of total 62.3%55.4%39.4%55.9%49.5%  59.2%

  Cultivators (% of total) 22.7%28.6%23.0%29.5%18.4%  31.6%

  Agric laborers (%of total) 
39.6%26.8%16.4%26.4%31.2%  27.6%
  Agric laborers/cultivators 1.750.940.710.901.69  0.88

        

GSDP/capita (2001)          11,154         17,394      17
,436       13,335        14,393             11,752 
        

Share of agric&allied 28.0%12.6%38.7%28.5%17.3%  24.2%

Agric&allied/capita            3,121           2,199        6,740          3,805          2,486              2,847 

Agricultural GSDP/worker            6,779           5,059      
17,909         8,530          5,552              7,603 
        

Agricultural wage (1999-00)       

  (Kharif, Rs/man-day) 45.3
243.7477.6642.7662.19  51.81
 Source: Population Census 2001 ; CMIE 2003 ; Reports of the 
Commission for Agric Costs and Prices 2001-02 (published 2002), 
pp.304f. 
 1.5 Agricultural growth has played a major role
 in rural poverty reduction in the past 
in Tamil Nadu, and could make subs
tantial contributions in the future.  Analysis based on 
household surveys indicates that the spread of green revolution technology in the 1970s and 
1980s contributed to sizeable increases in returns to
 land, raising farmer™s incomes.  Increasing 
demand for goods and services by farm households fu
rther stimulated expansion of the rural non-
farm economy contributing to poverty reduction. 
Although rural poverty rates declined by 6.7-
14.2 percent (depending on the definition of 
the poverty line), between 1993/94 and 1999/00, 
there remain between 7 and 11 million rural poor 
in Tamil Nadu (1999/00 data), 21-32 percent of 
the rural population.  Increases in agricultural 
production, processing and trade could enable further declines in rural poverty.    
 3  Fostering Agricultural Growth in Tamil Nadu 
 1.6 Yields of major crops in Tamil Nadu are among the highest in India, but 
productivity growth has slowed in recent years
. By the late 1990s, yields of major crops grown 
in Tamil Nadu including paddy, sugar cane, cotton and groundnut were among the highest across 
major Indian states.  In 1998-99, Tamil Nadu 
had the highest rice, sugar cane and groundnut 
yields in India and cotton yields in the state were second only to Gujarat.  Increases in yields 
enabled land productivity to grow by 6.1 per
cent per year between 1987/88 and 1993/94 from Rs 
16,423/ha to Rs 23,459/ha (in constant 93/94 Rs),
 but by only 2.4 percent per year between 
1993/94 and 1999/00 (to Rs 27,099/ha in constant
 93/94 Rs).  Likewise, average labor 
productivity in agriculture increased by an aver
age of 4.6 percent per year between 1987/88 and 
1993/94 from Rs 6,881 per worker to Rs 9,024 per 
worker (in constant 93/94 Rs), but by only 2.4 
percent per year between 1993/94 and 1999/00  to 
Rs 10,434 per worker (in constant 93/94 Rs).  
1.7 Traditional sources of agricultural growth
 face major constraints including growing 
water scarcity, increasing land degradation and 
declining farm sizes, and rising costs of 
agricultural labor. Tamil Nadu is one of the driest states 
in India, with an average of only 925 
millimeters of rainfall per year. The state has a 
dry season that extends over five months of the 
year (January through May) even in good years, and severe droughts occur in three out of every 
ten years severely limiting cultivation of crops betw
een the months of June and September.  The 
per capita availability of water resources of Tam
il Nadu is only 900 cubic meters compared to an 
all-India average of 2200 cubic meters per a
nnum. Irrigation through a combination of canals, 
tanks,5 and wells, increases the reliability and availability of water for farming, and is essential 
for successful cultivation of crops in much of the 
state.  Nonetheless, seasonality of supply and 
scarcity of water limit cultivation to only 
one crop per plot for most of the state.
6  In addition to growing water scarcity, the agricultural sector
 faces increasing competition for water from 
industries and domestic users and intensifying inte
rstate competition for surface water resources. 
In many parts of the state, the rate of extr
action of groundwater has exceeded recharge rates contributing to falling water tables. Water quality issues are also of increasing concern. Effluents 
discharged from industries as well
 as heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers have had a major 
impact on surface water quality, soils and groundwater.     
1.8 Agricultural land resources have also come
 under increasing pressure because of 
rapid population growth and increasing urbanization
. The available cultivable land per rural 
resident has declined from 0.22 ha/capita to 
0.15 ha/capita between 1971/72 and 1997/98. The 
growing pressures on land coupled with skew
ed pricing policies and rural poverty have 
contributed to land and soil degradation. As a r
esult, poor soil fertility, salinity, water logging, 
over grazing, and deforestation are growing pr
oblems and pose serious constraints to the 
performance of the agricultural sector
 in some parts of the state.  1.9 Solid growth in agricultural output and employment, rapid growth in the non-
agricultural sector, and rural-urban migration have all contributed to rising real 
agricultural wages over the past two decades.  
These higher returns to labor have contributed 
                                                     
 5 A tank is a manmade small-scale surface water reserv
oir on a gentle slope, designed so that water may 
flow out of the tank through the force of gravity.  
6 Average cropping intensity in Tamil Nadu is only
 1.20, compared to 1.34 (1998-99) for all-India. 
 4to the state™s success in raising rural incomes 
and reducing rural povert
y, though unemployment 
in the dry season remains a major factor underl
ying low incomes of poor rural households.  
 1.10 However, high real agricultural wages a
nd seasonal labor shortages have also 
increased the costs of cultivation, and tended 
to reduce the competitiveness of Tamil Nadu 
agriculture vis-à-vis other states and in international markets.  
Rural daily wage rates for 
male agricultural labor in the kharif season in 
Tamil Nadu in 1999-2000 averaged 62.2 Rs/day, 
compared with only 45.3 and 42.8 Rs/day in
 Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, respectively (
Table  1.1).  These higher labor costs have spurred m
echanization of some operations, including field 
preparation and rice harvesting, but small farm
 sizes constrain the rate of mechanization. 
 1.11 Faced with these constraints, the Governme
nt has adopted a strategy of agricultural 
diversification to accelerate agricultural growth
. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions are 
well suited to diversified agriculture. Furthermor
e, rapidly increasing incomes and changing food 
demand patterns provide strong impetus for 
diversification. The Government™s 10
th plan articulates a strategy to reinvigorate agricultura
l growth through improved productivity, higher 
cropping intensities, diversification and increasi
ng commercialization. Efficient land and water management underlie the proposed strategy for grow
th in agriculture. The Government™s recently 
announced approach to diversifying agriculture 
includes area expansion through the development 
of waste and fallow lands and crop substitution by further developing the horticultural sector. 
Emphasis is also placed on improving the productivit
y of water through the promotion of drip and 
sprinkler irrigation technology and improved irrigation practices.   
1.12 In spite of some promising recent steps, 
current price incentives do not promote 
efficient water and land resource use, and the 
research and extension system remains better 
suited for technology for traditional crops
. Existing input subsidies for power, water and 
fertilizer distort incentives for diversification and su
stainable use of natural resources. Further, the agricultural research and extension is not yet in
 a position to respond to the new demands of   
diversified agriculture. With its relatively edu
cated rural labor force and growing manufacturing 
sector, Tamil Nadu is well poised to capture the be
nefits of rural non-farm growth stimulated by 
both upstream and down stream linkages 
with diversified agriculture.   Plan of the Report 
 1.13 Against this background the objectives of
 this study are to assess agricultural 
policies in Tamil Nadu and the implications of
 these policies for future agricultural growth, 
food security and rural poverty reduction, and to recommend reform options
.  This report focuses on selected critical issues related to agricultural growth in
 Tamil Nadu, rather than a 
comprehensive review of the agricultural sector in 
the state. The analysis focuses on the structure 
of the agricultural economy, water management, 
agricultural subsidies, agricultural marketing 
and regulations, and implications
 of policy reforms for food security and consumption of the 
poor.   1.14 Chapter 2 provides an overview of the structure of the agriculture sector and the rural 
economy, focusing on the major crops and cropping 
patterns, livestock and fisheries. Chapter 3 
examines the importance of water for agricultu
re.  Chapter 4 discusses public policies and 
agricultural research and extension issues.  
Chapter 5 focuses on agricultural markets and 
marketing policies. Chapter 6 discusses issues re
lated to food security and rural poverty. The 
conclusion and policy options are presented in Chapter 7.   

1.15 This paper is based on the missions™ discussions
 with various stakeholders, including the 
Government of Tamil Nadu, farmers, agricultural laborers, private sector representatives and 
academics.  This work also draws on a backgroun
d paper, ﬁPromoting Agricultural Development 
 5in Tamil Nadu:  Perspectives, Dimensions and Potentials,ﬂ prepared by a team of researchers at 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University led by Pr
ofessor C. Ramasamy.  The study complements 
other concurrent analytic work (particular, the 
papers on  poverty and investment climate) on 
Tamil Nadu. 
 62. Overview  2.1 Tamil Nadu™s agriculture, though dominated fo
r centuries by rice cultivation in river 
basins, varies considerably across the state™
s major agro-climatic zones.  Although water 
availability limits cultivation on most land to a 
single crop, technological change in agriculture 
has enabled increased yields and production over a 
wide range of crops.  Livestock sector growth, particularly poultry and dairy products, has also accelerated in the 1990s. 
Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
 2.2 Tamil Nadu is divided into seven agro-climatic zones
 based on rainfall distribution, irrigation patterns, soil types, and other ecological characteristics (
Figure  2.1, 
Table  2.1).
7  The 
Cauvery Delta which forms its own agro-ecological
 zone, enjoys relatively high rainfall relative 
to most of Tamil Nadu (1101 millimeters per yea
r), and irrigation water through canals for six to 
seven months in good rainfall years in the catchme
nt area of the Cauvery river.  The Northeast, 
which includes Chennai, includes the Palar river basin and surrounding hillsides.  Sufficient 
concentrated rainfall and slow drainage enable
 irrigation from natural and man-made tanks.  
Average annual rainfall is slightly less in the 
North zone (849 millimeters); the western zone 
which receives very little rainfall from the southwest
 monsoon is the driest region, with only 714 
millimeters of average annual rainfall.
  Total rainfall in the Southern 
zone is similar to that of the 
north zone, but there are few large river basins, 
apart from the Tambraparni which flows south in 
Tirunelveli district.  The two remaining zones receive
 more rainfall than the rest of the state.  The 
High Rainfall zone, located in the southern tip of Tamil Nadu (Kanniyakum
ari district), receives 
heavy rainfall from the southwest monsoon, (annual 
average rainfall of 1457 millimeters).  In the 
Hilly zone that includes the mountains in Wester
n Tamil Nadu, (Nilgiris district and the western edge of several other districts), numerous types of tree crops are cultivated.      
Figure  2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
                                                       
 7 Rainfall data in Table 2.2 and other data on area, yield and production of crops by agro-climatic zones are 
based on data for the districts indicated.  Thes
e figures are only approximate indicators of the 
characteristics of the zones, howe
ver, since actual boundaries of ag
ro-climatic zones do not coincide 
exactly with district  boundaries.   
 7 2.3 Rice is the major crop in the Cauvery delta zone and the Northeast zone, 
(52.4 and 42.3 percent of gross area cultivated, respectivel
y), but plays a smaller role in the farming 
systems of the drier Western and Northwestern zones
 (9.6 and 15.9 percent of gross area 
cultivated, respectively) (
Table  2.2).  In these latter areas, other cereals, (millets, sorghum and 
maize) account for 18.8 and 24.6 percent of gross 
area cultivated, respectively.  Cropping patterns 
are more diversified in the Western, South, and High Rainfall zones, where the share of crops 
other than cereals, pulses, sugar cane, cotton a
nd groundnuts, is 38.1, 27.9 and 46.2 percent, respectively.  Tree crops dominate the cropping patterns in the Hilly zone.    
 Table  2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
Zone Districts Geogra
phical area Rainfall
    Million Ha Percent mm 
Northeastern (Yellow) Kancheepur
am, Thiruvallur, Vellore,     
  Thiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Cuddalore 31.2 24 1109 
Northwestern (Orange) Dharmapuri, Salem, Namakkal, Perambalur 18.3 14.1 849 
Western (Brown) Erode, Coimbatore, Karur, Dindigul 15.6 12 714 
Cauvery Delta (Green) Thiruchirapalli, Thanjavur, Thiruvarur,  19.2 14.8 1101 
  Nagapattinam    
Southern (Red) Theni, Madurai, Pudukottai,  41.5 31.9 814 
  Ramanathapuram, Sivagangai, Virudhunagar,    
  Thirunelveli, Thoothukudi    
High rainfall (Dark Green) Kanniyakumari 1.7 1.3 1457 
Hill  (Blue) The Nilgiris, Western ghats 2.5 2 1857 
Total Tamil Nadu   130 100 925 
Note: Data in Table 2.1 correspond to the boundaries of zones define
d by the Department of Agriculture as shown in Figure 1.1. 
 Other tables showing data by agro-climatic 
zone use slightly different definitions from Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (200
3); 
(see Appendix Table 1).   
 
Table  2.2:  Gross Area Cultivated and Cropping
 Patterns by Agro-ecological Zone   (2001-02)  
  GCA ('000 
has) 
Paddy 
Other 
Cereals Pulses Sugar Cane 
Ground-
nuts Cotton Other 
Crops All Crops
          
1. Northeast 1,600 42.3% 7.5%13.6%8.8%18.6%1.1% 8.2% 100.0%
2. Northwest 766 15.9% 24.6%20.9%5.7%20.9%3.8% 8.1% 100.0%

3. Western 638 9.6% 18.8%13.3%7.7%9.5%3.1% 38.1% 100.0%
4. Cauvery Delta 1,281 52.4% 8.5%19.0%3.4%5.1%2.7% 8.8% 100.0%
5. Southern 1,404 35.5% 9.9%14.2%3.1%4.9%4.5% 27.9% 100.0%

6. High Rainfall 98 28.7% 0.0%25.0%0.0%0.1%0.0% 46.2% 100.0%
7. Hilly 77 2.8% 0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0% 97.1% 100.0%

          
All Tamil Nadu 6,226 33.1% 11.3%18.0%5.2%10.6%2.6% 19.1% 100.0%
 2.4 Multiple cropping in Tamil Nadu is severely limited by the relatively low levels of 
rainfall, concentrated in only a few months of the year
.  Only one crop per year can be grown 
in the upland areas in most parts of the state. 
 Even in river valleys, 
water availability through 
 8surface irrigation in canals is sufficient for two cr
ops in only a few areas, and depends heavily on 
the extent and timing of the southwest monsoons. 
 Likewise, water availability through irrigation 
from tanks or wells is limited in the dry season. 
 Thus, although 55 percent of net area cultivated 
in Tamil Nadu is irrigated, the cropping intensity 
is only 1.2.  In the drier south region (zone 6), 
the cropping intensity is only 1.06 (Ramasamy et. al., 2003) . 
Major Crops  2.5 Rice dominates both agricultural production
 and food consumption, accounting for 
about one-third of total gross cropped area and 
nearly 60 percent of irrigated area in Tamil Nadu (Figure  2.2, Table  2.3). About 5 percent of total cropped area is devoted to sugar cane, all 
of it irrigated (accounting for almost 10 percent of irrigated land). Pulses (18 percent of total 
cropped area), millets (11 percent) and groundnuts 
(10 percent) require less water that rice or 
sugar cane, and, millets and pulses are grown al
most exclusively on non-irrigated land.  Cotton 
occupies only about 3 percent of cropped area; a
bout one third of the cotton crop is irrigated 
(Figure  2.3).  Water shortages, ample supplies of 
Food Corporation of India rice stocks, and 
potential for cultivation of higher value crops un
derlie the Tamil Nadu government™s policy of 
promoting crop diversification.   
Figure  2.2:  Distribution of Gross Cropped Area by Crop 
01,000
2,000
3,000

4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
1980-811990-912001-02
Gross Cropped Area ('000 Hectares)Other crops
Sugarcane
Cotton
Other cereals
Pulses
Millets
Cholam (Sorghum)
GroundnutPaddy 
 Source:  Ramasamy et. al, 2003
 Figure  2.3:  Irrigated Area by Crop (1999-2000) 
     
 
 
   
  
 05001000150020002500
Other Crops
Cotton
Sugar Cane
Pulses
Millets
Groundnut
Paddy
Area ('000 Hectares)
Cropped Area
Irrigated Area
 9  2.6 In most of Tamil Nadu, a single rice cro
p is grown, planted some time between 
August and October in anticipation of the onset of the northeast monsoons and harvested 
four to five months later.8  In the Cauvery delta region, which accounted for 33 percent of rice 
area cultivated in 2001/02, two rice crops are grow
n on land where sufficient water is available. On about 120 thousand hectares of cultivated land, the 
kuruvai (June/July Œ October/November) 
rice crop is followed by 
thaladi (October/November Œ February/March) in the four major 
districts9.  On another 200-240 thousand hectares of land, there is generally insufficient water for 
two crops (because of drought or lack of canal water), and a single 
samba  crop (August-January) 
is grown. Total gross cultivated area of rice in 
these districts is thus 440-480 thousand hectares.
 10   2.7 Rice production increased rapidly in Tamil Nadu from the 1950s to the 1970s, as 
green revolution technology (high-yielding varieties, fertilizer, and irrigation) spread
.  Area 
planted to paddy in Tamil Nadu expanded by 
52.6 percent from 1.73 million hectares in 1950/51 
to an average of 2.64 million hectares in 1970s, in
 part due to increased well irrigation.  Yields 
also increased, from an average of 1.31 tons of 
paddy (in rice equivalent) in the 1950s to 1.94 
tons in the 1970s.  As a result, average producti
on in the 1970s was 87 percent higher than that of 
the 1950s (Rajagopalan, 2000).    
2.8 Area planted to paddy peaked in 1979/80 (2.906 million hectares), but has declined 
steadily since that time, from 2.82 million h
ectares for the triennium ending (TE)  in 
1979/80 to 2.13 million hectares fo
r the triennium ending in 2001/02 (a 24.4 percent decline 
in total).  Yield increased by 67.6 percent over the 
same period (from 2.02 to 3.39 tons/ha), more 
than outweighing the decline in area.  The most ra
pid period of yield growth occurred in the late 
1980s: from the triennium ending in 1985/86 to 1990/01, yields increased by 44.1 percent from 
2.14 to 3.08 tons/hectare.  Overall for the en
tire period (1979/80 to 2001/02), production of rice 
increased 26.7 percent, reaching a peak of 8.14 million tons in 1998/99.     
2.9 Sugar cane, with a duration of 11 months, is grown on land irrigated by canals and 
wells.11  About 10 percent of irrigated area is plante
d with sugar cane and the crop requires, on 
average 1800 millimeters of water per unit area cu
ltivated.  Given that a single crop remains in 
the field year-round, however, its 
total water use per crop per year
 is less than two crops of paddy, but still greater than any other crop.  
Over all, sugar cane, which accounted for 5.16 
percent of gross cropped area in 2000-2001 used an estimated 14.0 percent of irrigation water 
resources.  Sugar cane yields in Tamil Nadu (109 to
ns/ha) are the highest in India (all-India yield 
is 68 tonnes/ha).  Four-fifths of sugar cane is sold 
directly to sugar mills; the remainder is used to 
make jaggery (i.e. gur or unrefined sugar).  
Government support prices have maintained output 
price incentives for sugar production over time.  While
 real market prices for paddy have declined 
                                                     
 8 The timing of the cropping seasons shown here and elsewhere in this report are approximate, and vary 
somewhat across regions and according to
 the timing of the monsoon rains. 
9 Figures on crop area by season are for the four districts of the Cauvery delta as defined by the Department 
of Agriculture: Thiruchirapalli, Thanjavur, Thiruvarur,
 and Nagapattinam.  Two other districts, Karur and 
Perambular, districts are included in the Cauvery Delta 
agro-climatic zone in the tables in this report.  
10 See Hazell and Ramasamy (eds.), (1991) for a detailed description of cropping patterns in North Arcot 
(Vellore and Thiruvannamalai districts).    
11 A second 
ratoon
 crop, grown from the roots and base of the stalks from the first harvest, is cultivated on 
approximately 70-80 percent of the area planted to sugar cane.   
             Source: Ramasamy et. al, 2003
  10by an average of 4.8 percent per year from 1990 to 
2000, real prices of sugar cane have increased 
slightly over the same period (0.5 percent per year) (
Table  2.4).    
 Table  2.3:  Area and Share of Gross Cropped Area (GCA) by Crop 
  1980-81
  1990-91
  2001-02 
    000 ha % GCA000 ha % GCA000 ha % GCA 
Paddy  2,29935.541,85628.072,060 33.08 
Cholam (Sorghum) 5919.145418.18317 5.09 
Cumbu (Pearl Millet) 3285.072744.15125 2.01 
Ragi (Finger Millet) 1973.041702.57125 2.01 
Maize 190.29270.4213 0.21 
Other cereals 2664.111692.5666 1.05 
Total cereals  3,70357.233,03845.952,766 44.43 
Total pulses  5448.4184712.811,122 18.03 
Total food grain 4,24765.643,88558.763,888 62.45 
Sugarcane 1832.832333.52321 5.16 
Vegetables --1472.22216 3.46 
Cotton 2213.412393.62164 2.64 
Groundnut 84213.0196314.56663 10.65 
Coconut 1121.731802.72336 5.39 
Fodder crop 1061.632103.17200 3.22 
Green manure 230.3640.058 0.13 
Gross cropped area  6,4701006,6121006,226 100 
Area cropped more than once 1,109-1,033-1,054 - 

Net cropped area  5,360-5,578-5,172 - 
Cropping intensity 1.2-1.19-1.2 - 
Source:  Ramasamy et. al, 2003 
 Table  2.4:   Growth rates of real 
Market Prices of Major Commodities 
Year Paddy CholamGroundnutCottonSugar Cane 
1980-1990 -3.00%-2.90%-1.50%-1.60%-2.20%
1990-2000 -4.80%1.00%-2.60%0.70%0.50%
1980-2000 -2.70%-1.40%-1.60%0.30%0.00%
Source: Paddy data from Raveendaran (
1994) and Department of Agriculture.  
All other crops from TNAU Agriculture Report  
 2.10 Cotton cultivation declined during the 1990s by 2.38 percent per year due to 
increased incidence of pests and diseases, the hi
gh cost of pesticides, and unstable output 
prices.  Cotton is cultivated throughout the state except 
in the high rainfall zones, with the largest 
concentration in the drier southern zone (
Table  2.5).   Although cotton requires less water than 
rice (about 600 millimeters per season), it is a 
longer duration crop (six months) than rice 
(generally 4 months).  Thus, cotton cultivation in
 most of Tamil Nadu requires some irrigation.  
 11Nonetheless, it does not grow well in water-l
ogged soils, making cotton cultivation difficult in 
canal systems with heavy soils and lack of wate
r control.  As a result, cotton cultivation is 
concentrated in the western zone, where irrigati
on in drier months is s
upplied by well water.  
Biological control methods that include intercroppi
ng of cotton with other plants have enabled a 
reduction in pesticide use in recent years.  Co
mmercial cultivation of genetically modified Bt 
cotton commenced in Tamil Nadu during 2002. (
Text Box  2.1).  Only about 50,000 tons of the 
600,000 tons of cotton lint used annually by 
the state™s textile factories (mainly around 
Coimbatore) are produced in the state; the bulk of
 the cotton lint derives from Maharashtra, other 
Indian states, and imports. 
 Table  2.5:  Tamil Nadu: Share of Area Cultiv
ated by Agro-ecologica
l Zone for Major Crops 
(2001-02) 
  GCA Paddy 
Other 
CerealsPulses Sugar Cane 
Groundnuts Cotton 
Other 
Crops 
         
1. Northeast 27.3% 32.8%17.7%23.4%43.8%45.7% 10.4% 9.4%
2. Northwest 13.1% 5.9%27.9%17.2%13.7%24.5% 17.9% 7.2%

3. Western 10.9% 3.0%17.7%9.1%15.4%9.2% 12.2% 21.2%
4. Cauvery Delta 21.8% 32.6%16.1%26.2%13.7%10.1% 20.9% 12.1%
5. Southern 23.9% 24.2%20.6%21.4%13.5%10.5% 38.6% 38.4%

6. High Rainfall 1.7% 1.4%0.0%2.6%0.0%0.0% 0.0% 3.0%
7. Hilly 1.3% 0.1%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0% 0.0% 8.7%

         
All Tamil Nadu 100.0% 100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
   Source:  Ramasamy et al. , 2003 
 Table  2.6:   Distribution of Gross Irrigated Area by Major Crops (1999-2000) 
  Cropped 
Area Cropped 
Area Irrigated Area Irrigated Area Irrigated/ Total Area
Water Requirement 
Share of 
Irrigated Water Use  '000 has percent '000 
has percent percent mms percent 
        
Paddy 216433.20%201658.70%93.20%1350 67.10%
Millets 77611.90%932.70%12.00%500 1.10%
Pulses 69310.60%---   ---   ---   400 
 Cotton 1782.70%621.80%34.80%650 1.00%
Sugar Cane 3164.80%3169.20%100.00%1800 14.00%
Groundnut 75911.60%2657.70%34.90%500 3.30%
Other Crops 163325.00%68419.90%29.40%800 13.50%
Total 6519100.00%3436100.00%52.70%
 100.00%
Current Fallow 1085
      
Other Fallows 1139            
Note: Irrigated area under other crops includes pulses. Water re
quirements for other crops estimated at 800 mms, given water 
requirements of chilies and turmeric (850) 
and tomatos (550). Share of water use estimated using water requirement times irriga
ted area.  This estimate assumes that each irrigated crop receives
 the same share of its water requirements from irrigation. 
Source: GoTN, 2002b.
   122.11 Production of cholam (sorghum/jowar),
 cumbu (pearl millet/bajra), and ragi 
(mundua/finger millet) increased slightly in 
the 1980s, but declined in the 1990s,
 registering overall growth rates of -2.33, -2.05 and -1.02 pe
r cent respectively over the entire period.  These 
crops (included along with maize in the broad category of ﬁmilletsﬂ in Tamil Nadu), are grown 
almost exclusively on non-irrigated land, as cumbu 
and ragi are particularly drought tolerant.  
Often planted on non-irrigated land in December/
January after the northeast monsoon has ended, 
the crop survives on residual moisture and is harv
ested in the dry season (around April).  Shifts in 
food habits due to increased income and urba
nization have reduced demand for these crops, and 
real prices of cholam declined by 1.4 percent pe
r year over the 1980s and 1990s, despite the slow 
growth in production (
Table  2.4).      
Text Box  2.1:  Bt Cotton in Tamil Nadu 
  2.12 Maize production has increased very rapidly (by 8.25 percent per year) over the last 
two decades from just 20 thousand tons in 1980-81 to 118 thousand tons in 2001-02
, due to an increase in demand from the poultry and ot
her livestock feed industries. Production is 
concentrated in western and southern zones, the 
two zones with the lowest annual rainfall.  There 
has been little change in average yields, whic
h have hovered at about 1.6 tons/hectare. 
2.13     Groundnut production increased by 5.07 percent per year in the 1980s, but 
stagnated during the 1990s (declining by 0.50 percent year), due to a decline in area 
cultivated (Table  2.7).  Slack demand for groundnuts, reflected 
in an average decline in real 
market prices of 2.6 percent year in the 
1990s, has reduced producer incentives, as well (Table 
 2.4).  Nonetheless, yields have increased by an
 average of 3.32 percent over the 1980s and 1990s.  
Groundnuts require far less water than rice and do not
 perform well in water-logged soils, so they 
Genetically modified Bt cotton has been grown commercially in Tamil Nadu since 2002 and is 
currently the only biotech crop that has been approved for commercial cultivation in the state. Bt cotton 
contains the gene for Cry1AC which provides a high degree of resistance to the bollworm, a common 
pest whose larvae feed on cotton bolls. The technology introduced into India through a collaboration 
between Monsanto and the Maharashtra Hybrid 
Seed Company (Mahyco) 
received commercial 
approval in 2002 with farmers in Tamil Nadu harvesting their first crop of Bt cotton in 
January/February, 2003.   
 According to data from Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) Ltd. (MMB) 295 farmers have planted Bt 
Cotton over an area of 374 hectares in Tamil Nadu.  Of the 925 packets of seed sold during the 2002 
Kharif crop, 745 were of the MECH 162 variety, with the remaining 180 being of the MECH 184 
variety
.    Early experience from the state indi
cates that pesticide use against bollworms dropped by 65-70 percent 
on most farms and farmers realized an average yield in
crease of 30 percent  (MMB).  As a result of the 
drought in Tamil Nadu last year the pest pressure wa
s low resulting in the Bt cotton crop faring fairly 
well in the state in comparison to other southern states which grew Bt cotton. Normally farmers spray 
8-10 times for controlling bollworms in their cotton crop.  As many as 15 sprays may be needed in 
some districts of Tamil Nadu.  Farmers cultivating Bollgard in 2002-03 managed their crop with a 

maximum of 4 sprays.  In most cases farmers only used 2-3 sprays in the Bollgard Cotton crop, 
compared to 6-8 sprays used in other commercial cotton crops. 
 
As pest related damage on cotton plots in India is fairly high (averaging 50-60 percent), the yield 
effects of Bt cotton in field trials in India have b
een larger than those observed in countries such as 
China and the United States where pest pressure is lower and farmers exhibit a higher rate of pesticide 
adoption.  It is still too early to assess the real 
success of Bt cotton in Tami
l Nadu.  Increasing bollworm 
resistance to Bt resulting from 
poor farm management practices 
is growing cause for concern. 
 13are typically grown from December through April,
 after the heavy monsoon rains.  Nonetheless, 
for 35 percent of area cultivated, supplemental irrigation is used in the dry season. Groundnut 
cultivation is concentrated in the Northeast 
and North zones which account for 70 percent of 
groundnut area cultivated, (45.7 and 24.5
 percent, respectively).     
2.14 The share of gross cultivated area devot
ed to horticultural and other crops has 
increased from 15.1 percent in 1980-81 to 19.5 p
ercent in 1990-91, but has remained at only 
19.1 percent in 2001-02
.  In 2002-03 approximately 815,000 hectares (12.5 percent of total 
cropped area) was under horticultural crops. Plantation crops accounted for 29 percent of the 

horticultural crop area with fruits, vegetables and spices accounting for a further 28 percent, 22 
percent and 19 percent, respectively. The re
cently announced Comprehensive Wasteland 
Programme aims at promoting perennial horticulture crops on 2 million hectares of cultivable 
wastelands in the state. The 
state has also been promoting the cultivation of medicinal and 
aromatic plants with these crops accounting for 
approximately 5000 hectares (less than 1 percent 
of total cropped area). There is a growing interest in bio-fuel crops (Jatropha and Paradise Tree) 
although these crops are yet to be grown commercially in the state.  
Table  2.7:  Growth Rates in Area, Yields and Production: 1980s and 1990s 
  % GCA  Area     Yield     Production 
  2001-02 1980's 1990'sOverall 1980's1990'sOverall 1980s 1990s Overall
Rice 33.08
-2.53 1.03-0.247.540.872.874.821.902.62
Cholam 
5.09
-0.99 -4.92-3.995.85-0.731.744.8-5.61-2.33
Cumbu 
2.01
-2.52 -6.13-4.414.23.092.481.57-3.23-2.05
Ragi 
2.01
-2.18 -4.58-3.233.990.202.291.72-4.39-1.02
Maize  0.21
5.88 10.358.001.00-0.110.236.9410.238.25
Red gram 
1.02
5.43 -5.870.062.021.130.187.56-4.810.24
Green gram 
2.07
3.89 -1.42.854.38-0.062.088.44-1.454.99
Black gram 
4.27
7.98 -2.591.953.72-1.261.6611.99-3.813.64
Horse gram 
1.61
-4.8 -6.06-4.172.91.722.99-2.05-4.45-1.31
Sugarcane 
5.16
2.83 3.73.40.520.780.593.364.514.01
Turmeric 
0.38
3.2 11.352.573.381.350.636.6912.853.22
Coriander 
0.48
-0.89 -4.62-3.65-0.320.67-3.28-1.2-3.99-6.81
Groundnut 
10.65
2.33 -3.830.322.683.473.325.07-0.503.65
Gingelly 
1.35
5.00 -4.720.62-2.24.772.222.69-0.182.85
Cotton 
2.64
3.00 -2.570.44.50.20.937.64-2.381.34
Tapioca 
1.73
3.78 1.263.612.120.771.855.982.045.52
Banana 
  0.22 3.653.156.943.24.487.176.967.77
Tomato 
0.43
6.68 8.147.29        -- 0.060.06       -- 7.127.12
Onion 
0.46
1.12 3.222.340.570.41-1.071.73.641.25
Other 
Crops 
25.35
           
Total 
100
                  
  Source:  Ramasamy et al, 2003 
 Output Price Incentives: Nominal Rat
es of Protection for Major Commodities 
 2.15 For most of the last two decades, produ
cers of rice and cotton in Tamil Nadu have 
been implicitly taxed through price and trad
e policies that kept domestic prices below 
 14border prices
.12 The nominal protection coefficient (NPC) for paddy, calculated as the domestic 
price (in this case the procurement price for common variety paddy), divided by the border price,  
averaged only 0.64 in the 1990s; i.e. the procur
ement price was on average 36 percent below the 
border price (Table  2.8).  Similarly, cotton (kapas) prices  were 26 percent below border prices 
(average across India).  Sugar prices, however, 
were 21 percent higher th
an border prices in the 
1980s and only 8 percent below border prices in the 1990s.  2.16 There has been no implicit taxation of rice in Tamil Nadu through price and trade 
policies in recent years, however
.  NPC™s for paddy in 2001-02 are, in fact, slightly positive.  
Cotton (all-India average) remains taxed relativ
e to international prices, as does groundnut.
13  Prices of refined sugar are likewise near (import parity) border prices.  Thus, estimated trade 
distortions for the two most water-intensive ma
jor crops in Tamil Nadu (paddy and sugar cane) 
have declined, and were mi
nimal in 2001 and 2002.   
 Table  2.8:  Nominal Protection Coefficien
ts for Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 1980-2002 
  RiceaRicebCottonCottonSugarSugarGroundnut
 (paddy)(paddy)(kapas)(kapas)(refined)(refined)(pods)
Importable / 
Exportable ImportImportExportImportExportImportImport
        
1981-19900.831.200.970.871.581.211.31

1991-20000.640.760.800.741.210.920.83
2001-20021.031.060.650.591.471.040.79
        
Note:  a Using procurement price of paddy (common variety). 
b Using wholesale price of paddy (common variety). All NPCs except 
for cotton are measured at TN rural markets, assuming that rural 
market exports to Chennai.  NPCs for cotton are national avera
ges.  Rice: 15% broken, FOB Bangkok.  Groundnuts: C&F Rotterdam (kernels
) converted to pods using 0.7 kgs kernel/ kg pods.  Cotton: 
World prices of lint cotton, converted to value of s
eed cotton (kapas; Sugar: FOB Europe, refined sugar. 
 Source: Gulati and Marayanan (2003); authors' calculations 
Agricultural Inputs: Fertilizer Use and Mechanization 
 Average fertilizer consumption in Tamil Nadu has increased
 over the years with consumption 
per hectare increasing from 107.86 Kg in 1986/87 to
 121.03 Kg in 1999/00, an average annual 
growth rate of 1.90 percent per annum. Aver
age per hectare consumption was  66.7 Kg for 
Nitrogen, 28.33 Kg for Potash and 26.01 Kg 
for phosphorous. Approximately 67 percent of 
households growing crops report use of fertilizers (
Table  2.9).  The proportion of farmers 
reporting use of fertilizers is slightly lower than Punjab and AP, but higher states such as 

Maharashtra and Karnataka. 

                                                      
 12    Note that the nominal protection coefficients 
do not include any adjustment in exchange rates.  
Accounting for the overvaluation of the rupee in the 1980s and early 1990s would raise the estimated 
border price in rupee terms and lowe
r the nominal protection co
efficients in this period.  Thus, the degree 
of taxation on Tamil Nadu agriculture in the 1980s 
and early 1990s is understated in Table  2.8.   
13   The estimated 21 percent implicit taxation of groundnuts relative to world prices may reflect domestic 
constraints in processing and marketing, as well as 
differences in quality of groundnuts for alternative end 
uses (direct consumption and crus
hing for groundnut cake and oil).  
 15   Table  2.9:  Characteristics of Ag
riculture in Variou
s States (1998) 
  Andhra
 PradeshKarnatakaMaharashtraPunjabTamil Nadu
Principal Cropped Area  (ha) 1.332.091.722.600.86
Households Using Tractors/Power 
Tillers 43.53%16.11%13.75%92.38%49.96%
Households Using Fertilizers 70
.59%53.40%56.25%72.10%67.16%
Households Using Pesticides 82.14%63.04%49.74%86.86%86.40%
Households Using Improved Seeds 69.70%69.17%70.31%80.05%66.93%
Households Using Weedicides 24.32%27.97%15.08%78.58%52.70%
Households that Own Electric 
Pumps 
30.21%19.36%28.77%51.03%32.69%
Households that Own Diesel Pumps 5.82%2.30%3.85%38.10%14.71%
Source:  Authors™ calculations using the 
54th round of the NSS (1998).  Households re
ported area cultivated under five principa
l crops 
and the use of various inputs for each  principal crops. 
 2.17 Rates of pesticide consumption appear to be declining over time
 with growing 
awareness of the deleterious health effects of expos
ure to chemicals, the use of organic pesticides 
and the adoption of pest resistant varieties of crops
.  Despite this farmers 
in Tamil Nadu appear to 
be more likely to use pesticid
es and weedicides as compared to farmers in Neighboring states 
such as AP, Karantaka and Maharashtra.  Approximately 53 percent of farmers in Tamil Nadu 
report using weedicides and about 86 percent repor
t using pesticide, insecticides, fungicides etc.  
The proportion of households reporting using pestic
ides is comparable to Punjab.  Approximately 
67 percent of farmers report using improved varieties of seeds. The proportion of farmers using 

improved varieties of seeds in Tamil Nadu is less than most southern Indian states and Punjab 

where close to 80 percent of farmers use improved seed varieties.  
2.18 The degree of mechanization in agriculture 
in Tamil Nadu is still relatively low
 although it is higher than most southern states. According to data from the 54
th round of the NSS 
(1998), only 50 percent of  agricultural households
 in the state used tractors or power tillers 
(Table  2.9).  While the degree of mechanization is re
latively low compared to Punjab where more 
than 90 percent of agricultural households reported using tractors/power tillers it is higher than most southern state including Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra and Karnataka. The majority of 
households  (89 percent)  using tractors or power tillers in Tamil Nadu  rented these services.  
Land  2.1 Current land distribution and use in much
 of Tamil Nadu reflect centuries old 
patterns of settlement and cultivation in the valleys and plains
.14  In pre-colonial society, 
                                                     
 14 Baker (1984) distinguishes a third major region, Kongunad, in western Tamil Nadu (approximating the 
modern districts of Coimbatore and Erode), as a mix of plains and valley geography and society.  P.93f 
 16river valley villages, where agriculture centered on 
irrigated rice, were divided into two exclusive 
groups: the land owning Brahman and Vellala (nobl
es), and the outcaste laborers (usually Pallan 
or Paraiyan) (Baker, 1984:87).  The economy of the 
drier plains with generally poor soils outside 
the valleys was based on livestock, hunting, culti
vation of millet, and non-agricultural activities.
15   2.2 The average farm size (individual holdings) 
in 1995-96 was only 0.91 hectares, with 
52.5 percent of farms less than 0.5 hectares
 (Table  2.10). 74.3 percent of farms were less than 
1.0 hectare, accounting for only 30.2 percent of the land.   
Table  2.10:  Land Distribution in Tamil Nadu, 1995-96 
Size of holding Number Percent
age Area Area Area (Ha) 
(hectares) Of farms of farms
 (hectares)(percent)(average) 
      
Less than 0.5 4,205,41352.49982,35613.45 0.23 
0.5-1.0 1,745,69121.791,227,98816.81 0.70 

1.0 - 2.0 1,233,83615.401,721,28823.57 1.40 
2.0 - 4.0 600,8337.501,622,81022.22 2.70 
4.0 - 10.0 199,7912.491,134,85315.54 5.68 

Greater than 10.0 26,2680.33613,9118.41 23.37 
      
Total (all sizes) 
8,011,832100.007,303,206100.00 0.91 
 Source:  GoTN, 2002a 
Land Resource Policy and Administration   
 2.19 There is no explicit statement of State Land Use policy in Tamil Nadu; the policies 
are implicit in the legislative and administra
tive measures related to the regulation of land 
use.  The Revenue Department administrates all 
the government lands including those vested 
with the various departments of the state gove
rnment.  Following the Tamil Nadu Patta Pass 
Book Act, 1983, private owners of agricultural land 
are issued Patta pass books.  These serve as 
evidence of ownership that facilitates loans fro
m financial institutions, co-operative banks and 
commercial bank. 
2.20 Land reforms in India were designed to (1) to
 enhance the productivity of land (2) to 
ensure distributive justice (3) to create a syst
em of peasant proprietorship and (4) to transfer the incomes of the few to many so
 that the demand for consumer goods would be 
created.  By 1972, laws had been passed in all the 
States to abolish intermediaries. In Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Or
issa, measures in the form of an order for 
staying ejection have been adopted to give tem
porary protection to the tenants. As a result of 
these measures, 92 per cent of the holdings in Indi
a are wholly owned and self-operated.  By the 
year 1972, ceiling legislation had been passed in 
all the States. Land ceilings in Tamil Nadu (4.86 
hectares for irrigated land with two crops; 12.14
 hectares for irrigated land with one crop and 
24.28 hectares for dry land) have relatively little 
effect on land distribution, however, due to 
registration of land in the names of various family
 members, and reportedly even in the names of 
                                                     
 15 ﬁThe importance of agriculture in the valleys made
 control of land the crucial feature of social 
organiztion.  By contrast the crucial feature in the 
plains was control of men– The importance of military 
service and, to a lesser extent, the production of goods and services, laid great stress on the control of men 
and their ability to work or fight.ﬂ Baker, p. 90. 
 17workers (with their knowledge).  Nonetheless, th
e number of farms greater than 10 hectares is 
rather small (0.33 percent), accounti
ng for only 8.41 percent of area (
Table  2.10). 
Livestock  2.21 The performance of the livestock sector has been strong. 
The livestock sector 
(including animal husbandry, poultry and dairy) is
 an important contributor to Tamil Nadu™s 
agricultural growth.  This sectors is also important for rural livelihoods offering a source of 
income and employment. For many rural househ
olds livestock are the main instrument for 
savings and insurance. Livestock also provide a source of power for tilling land and organic 
fertilizer (manure). According to the last census,
 TN had about 5.3 percent of India™s livestock 
population. Thirty-eight percent of the livestock population comprises of cattle, 11 percent of 
buffaloes, 25 percent goat, 20 percent sheep a
nd 2 percent pigs  (Livestock Census, 1997).
16  TN 
ranks second among Indian states in egg producti
on and nineth in terms of milk production.
17  Approximately 6 percent of national milk prod
uction came from TN in 2001/02 and the state 
accounted for 11.9 percent of  India™s egg production. 
2.22 There is significant growth potential for the livestock and poultry sectors arising 
from growing consumer demand.
  With increasing urbanization and growing per capita 
incomes, the demand for animal products (meat, 
eggs and dairy) in Tamil Nadu have been 
increasing. Production of the main animal products
 has also been increasing to meet consumer 
demand.  Milk production in the state has increased from 3.29 million tones in 1986-87 to 4.90 
million tones in 2000-2001. Milk production increased at an average annual rate of 4 percent. Egg 

production has also increased by approximately 
4 percent per annum in the 1990s. Growth of  
meat production has been much slower averagi
ng 1 percent per annum between 1996/97-99/00. 
Cross bread cows contribute to approximately 37 per
cent of the milk produced in the state, while 
indigenous breads and  buffaloes contribute roughly 
26 percent and 37 percent, respectively. Milk 
yields (yield per animal) from crossbred cows of 
5.72 Kg/day are slightly lower than the all-India 
average of 6.36 Kg/day, but significantly lower than
 yields in Punjab (8
.7 Kg/day).  The same 
trend can be observed for yields from buffalo
es which is 3.68 Kg/day. Yield from indigenous 
cows (2.4 Kg/day) are comp
aratively high compared to most India states.   
2.23 Most of the poultry production in the state derives from large commercial units
. 70 percent of  poultry products are produced by 
commercial farmers with 
the remaining 30 percent 
being produced by small holders (personal comm
unication with Secretary, Animal Husbandry). 
While this increases efficiency 
in production, food safety concerns and concerns for animal 
welfare will increase. Environmental effects, pa
rticularly eutrophication from high levels of 
phosphorous and nitrogen runoffs, could become pr
oblematic without proper regulation. Small-
holders may be crowded out of the sector since by its structure the industry lends itself to 
economies of scale. The growth in the poultry i
ndustry has contributed to rapidly increasing 
demand for maize as poultry feed. 
2.24 Unlike poultry production, the dairy industry is still dominated by small-holders.
 Much of the milk produced in the state is ma
rketed through milk producers cooperatives. In 2001-
2002 the state had 8,238 Dairy Cooperative Societies with a membership of approximately 2.04 
million members. The number of dairy coopera
tives and farmer members in Tamil Nadu has 
almost quadrupled since the early 1980s (NDDB, Annual Report, 2000/01). The commercial 

sector produces 30 percent of milk, with small 
holders (who have an average of 1-3 cows) 
                                                     
 16 Livestock population refers to cattle, buffalo, goats, sheep and pigs. 
17 Ranks are computed based on average production in Indian states between 1999 and 2001. 
 18-4.00%
-2.00%
0.00%

2.00%
4.00%
6.00%

8.00%
10.00%
1980-
81/84-85
85/86-
89/90
90/91-
94/95
95/96-
99/00
Growth in Fisheries SDP
Tamil Nadu
All-India
producing 70 percent of milk in the state (p
ersonal communication with Secretary, Animal 
Husbandry).  Recent drought in the state has re
duced fodder production which has implications 
for the quality of milk yields from cows and 
buffaloes. Adequate cold storage and further 
improvements in veterinary services are needed 
for this sector to realize its full potential. 
Fisheries 
 2.25 Tamil Nadu™s fisheries sector has significan
t potential, but its performance has been 
mixed.  
The state has a coastal length of 1,076 km, equi
valent to 15% of India™s coast line and is 
also well-endowed in terms of in-land fisheries.  The inland fisheries sector has about 370,000 ha 
of water spread area, comprising of 52,000 ha of reservoirs, 97,700 ha of major irrigation and 
long seasonal tanks, 158,100 ha of
 short seasonal tanks and ponds 
and 63,000 ha under estuaries, backwaters and swamps.                               
 Figure  2.4:  Growth in Fisheries SGDP 
  
 
 
     
 
                                                Source:  India States Database 
 2.26 The contribution of the fisheries sector to
 total agricultural and allied sector GDP 
has decreased over the past two decades from 
roughly 7% in the early 1980s to 4.5% in 
2001/02 
(Figure  2.4:). Growth in the fisheries sub sector 
has fluctuated and growth rates 
consistently fall below all-India averages.  Pr
oduction is around 0.5 million tones with four-fifths 
of fish production from wild fisheries (marine fi
sheries). The state™s fish
 production accounts for 13.2 percent of total marine fish production and 4 
percent of total in-land fish production in India 
(GoTN, 2001c).  
2.27 Marine fisheries are an important export
 earner for the state and accounted for 
5.5% of total export earnings in 2001
. The coast of Tamil Nadu has also become attractive for 
investment in shrimp culture. However growth 
in shrimp production has slowed down since a ban 
was imposed on shrimp culture in the Coastal Regul
ation Zone (area within 50 metres of the coast 
line) due to growing problems with salinity  (GoTN, 2001c).   
 The Rural Non-farm Sector 
 2.28 The non-farm sector is an important so
urce of income and employment for rural 
households in Tamil Nadu
.  Data from 1993/94 indicate that on average income from non-farm 
sources accounted for 46.4 percent of rural house
holds incomes. The average real per capita 
 190102030405060Income Quintiles
Percentage of Household Income
Cultivation
Agriculture wage Labour
Total Nonfarm sources
Other sources
income in 1993/94 was Rs 4,867. In Tamil 
Nadu the share of non-farm income increases 
monotonically with households wealth. For the 
lowest expenditure quintile, non-farm incomes accounted for 19.8 percent of household incomes, on 
average.  In contrast, income from non-farm 
sources contributed slightly more than half of household income for 
the  wealthiest quintile.                       
  2.29 The Government of Tamil Nadu has enco
uraged development of the non-farm sector through the Tamil Nadu Khadi and V
illage Industries Board established in 1960.  The Board promotes Khadi and Village Industries 
in order to create employment opportunities for 
rural artisans. Khadi industries are involved in the  production of cotton, wool, silk and muslin 
while village industries engage in production ac
tivities that are mineral-, forest-, polymer and 
chemical-, agro-, engineering-, textile-, and service-based. 
The Board provides financial assistance 
to artisans to start their own industries.
 In 2000-01 Khadi and Village Industries provided employment for approximately 1 million worker
s. Among the various industries, almost 71 
percent of employment was in agro-based indus
tries with Palm Gur production alone accounting 
for 60 percent of employment in Khadi and Village industries  (
Figure  2.6:).  Total earnings of 
the Khadi and Village based industries in 2000/01 amounted to approximately Rs 2.7 billion.  
Other important industries in term
s of employment creation were 
pottery, bee-keeping and village 
leather production. 
 Figure  2.5:  Non-farm Income Sha
re in Rural Tamil Nadu, 1993/94 
    
   
      
 
 2.30 Continued growth of the agro-processing sector is likely
. Value added in the agro-
processing sector in Tamil Nadu grew by 
3.4 percent between 1989/90 and 1997/98, the 
latest year for which data is available
  (Table  2.12).
 Population growth, rising incomes, and 
increased urbanization will foster an increasing 
shift in demand from raw, unprocessed products 
to high value processed foods. Food products and 
cotton textiles accounted for 10 percent  and 28 
percent of net value added by the industrial sector
 in the late 1990s (1997/87). By 1997/98 four 
agro-processing industries, cotton spinning, w
eaving and processing, processing, manufacture 
and refining of sugar, processing 
and blending of tea and grain milling accounted for 87 percent 
of value added in the agro-processing sector and clos
e to 80 percent of employment in the sector 
(Figure  2.7:). 
2.31  In order to encourage growth of the agro-processing sector Tamil Nadu has 
recently launched the New Anna Marumalarchi Thittam
. The 2002-03 Budget speech 
announced the restructuring of the existing A
nna Marumalarchi Thittam scheme into the New 
Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003
 20Anna Marumalarchi Thittam which will place 
special emphasis on the agro-processing sector. 
The new scheme in effect since June 2002 encour
ages the development of 
small scale agro-based 
industries such as processing of horticultural prod
ucts, flower based extracts, coir and food 
processing. Under the scheme, investment in agro-based industries w
ill be encouraged in each of 
the 385 Blocks of Tamil Nadu through a packages of subsidies and incentives.  
Figure  2.6:  Employment and Earnings in Khadi and Village Industries, 2000/01 
   Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003. 
 Table  2.11:  Employment by Major Agro-processing Industries, 1989/90-1996/97 
(Millions of  Man Days) 
  Grain 
Milling  Manufacture 
and Refining 
of Sugar 
Processing and 
Blending of 
Tea  Cotton Spinning, 
Weaving and 
Processing in Mills
Other total 
89-90 4.96.72.355.113.482.4
90-91 4.86.72.950.116.781.2
91-92 5.16.12.651.517.582.9
92-93 5.96.12.83.519.037.4
93-94 6.17.23.462.921.0100.6
94-95 4.86.32.962.522.599.0
95-96 5.05.93.056.923.494.2
96-97 6.16.33.668.120.2104.2
Growth (%) 1.8-1.04.66.96.74.8
  Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003. 
020406080KhadiMineral basedIndustries
Forest based
Industries
Polymer and
chemical Agro-basedindustries
Engineeringand Non-conventional 
Textile
Industries
Type of Village Industry
Share of Employment and Earnings (%)
Employment
Earnings
 21 Table  2.12: Value Added in the Agro-processing
 Sector by Major Agro-processing Industries, 
1989/90-1997/98  (Rs Billion in constant 1993/94 Rupees) 
  Grain 
Milling  Manufacture and Refining of 
Sugar Processing and Blending of Tea  
Cotton 
Spinning, Weaving and Processing in Mills Other total 
89-90 0.22.71.611.62.718.8
90-91 0.41.71.312.52.418.4
91-92 0.62.22.39.42.517.0
92-93 0.42.91.310.61.817.1
93-94 0.62.41.512.72.319.4
94-95 0.62.82.112.32.520.2
95-96 0.72.01.29.82.215.9
96-97 0.82.41.612.22.819.9
97-98 0.62.51.520.53.628.8
Growth (%) 
12.61.1-1.24.12.93.4
    
Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003.
   Figure  2.7:  Value Added in the Ag
ro-Processing Sector by Industry 
0%20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
89-9091-9293-9495-9697-98Year
Share of Value Added in Agro-Processing SectorOther
Cotton Spinning, Weaving
and Processing in Mills
Processing and Blending of

Tea 
Manufacture and Refining of

Sugar
Grain Milling 
  Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003.
 223. Water for Agriculture 
 3.1 Tamil Nadu is a water scarce state. The annual 
per capita availability of water resources 
of Tamil Nadu is only 900 cubic meters compared 
to an all-India average of 2200 cubic meters. 
The rainfall received by the state is highly variable
 and drought conditions prevail in three out of 
every 10 years.  Water is an essential factor 
of production for agriculture, which consumes 75% 
of the state™s water resources.  Faced with growing scarcity, increasing demand for water from 

industries and commercial uses, and intensifying  
interstate competition for water, improving the 
productivity of water (ﬁgetting more crop from every 
dropﬂ) in irrigated and rainfed agriculture is 
of great urgency in Tamil Nadu.  
3.2 Improving the productivity of water in agriculture needs commitments to policy, 
institutional and management reforms as well as investments in crop research, technology and 
infrastructure. Tamil Nadu has already embarked 
on a process of reform including decentralizing 
water resources management along river basins, fo
rmalizing irrigation management transfer to 
users, revising water tariffs, and promoting wa
ter saving technologies.  Commencing with a brief 
introduction to water resources in the state, th
e following chapter elaborates on recent reforms 
and the challenges that lie ahead for the state to
 increase agricultural growth while meeting the 
needs of other uses.  
Water Resources  
 3.3 Geographically, most of Tamil Nadu is a dr
y plain, with river valleys surrounded by 
low hills.  The normal rainfall in the plains in the state is 925 millimeters per year, concentrated 
during two monsoon seasons-the southwest a
nd the northeast monsoon (Agrostat, 2001).
18 Most 
of the rains from the southwest monsoon extending
 from June through September are blocked by 
mountains (the Western Ghats), on Tamil Nadu™s 
western border with Kerala and Karnataka.  
Except in the southern tip of Tamil Nadu (especi
ally Kanniyakumari district), the southwestern 
monsoons are highly variable. The northeast mons
oon rains, from October through December are 
more reliable and on average account for 47 percent of
 annual rainfall in the state. Little rain falls during the winter (January-Februar
y) or summer (March-May).   
                                                                                 Figure 
 3.1:  Rainfall and Agricultural & Allied GSDP 
 3.4 Rainfall in the state is highly variable and 
has a pronounced effect on the performance of 
the agricultural sector
 (Figure  3.1, Table  3.1). In 
six years between 1980 and 2001 total rainfall was 
less than 90 percent of the average for the two 

decades.  For these years, 
 real agricultural GDP was on average 8.1 percent below trend GDP. A 
regression analysis shows that a one percent 
increase in rainfall relative to the mean is 

associated with a 0.3 percent increase in real 

agricultural GDP relative to the trend agricultural 
GDP. 19   
                                                      
 18 India™s average annual rainfall is 1,100 mm per year. 
19 The regression equation is y=0.001+ 0.298x where y is the percent deviation in agricultural GDP from 
its logarithmic trend value, and x is the percent devi
ation in total rainfall from its mean value over the 
period.  The standard deviation of the estimated coefficient on x is 0.100, t-statistic is 2.97 and the R
2=0.31.   
-30%-20%
-10%0%10%20%
30%40%19801982
198419861988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000Percentage Deviation from 
the MeanTotal Rainfall
Agricultural  & Allied GSDP
Source:  Authors™ calculations 
 23 Table 
 
3.1:  Rainfall in Tamil Nadu 
      Share of Normal 
Season Months Normal RainfallAnnual Rainfall 
    (mms) (percent) 
    
Winter rains Jan Œ Feb 42.2 4.5 
Summer rains Mar Œ May 136.5 14.8 

Southwest monsoon Jun Œ Sep 307.6 33.3 
Northeast monsoon Oct Œ Dec 438.7 47.4 
    
Total Rainfall   925 100 
  
3.5 Tamil Nadu has 17 river basins
 (including groups of minor basins), all flowing eastwards 
from the Western Ghats and Deccan plateau.
20  The major rivers in the state are the Cauvery, 
Palar, Vellar, Vaigai and Tambaraparani. The Cauv
ery delta, the largest river basin in the state, 
has been the rice bowl of Tamil Nadu for over 1500 years since the construction of the Grand 
Anicut (dam), which diverted water from the Ca
uvery to a system of irrigation canals. Water 
from the Cauvery is used to irrigate approxima
tely 20 million hectares of land in Tamil Nadu. 
Cauvery water is shared with Ka
rnataka (located upstream) and is the subject of ongoing disputes 
between the two states.   3.6 The state™s water resources are divided near
ly evenly between surface water (23.6 
billion cubic meters) and groundwater (22.3 billion cubic meters)
.  Utilization rates are 
estimated to be 93% for surface water and 60% for groundwater. In many parts of the state, the 
rate of extraction of groundwater has exceeded recharge rates contributing to falling water tables.  
Out of 385 blocks in the state 23 percent are 
dark (extraction exceeding 100 percent of the recharge), another 23 percent of blocks are grey (extraction exceeding 65 percent of the 
recharge). The dark and grey blocks are particularly concentrated in the Western and North-
Western Zones.  3.7 Water quality issues are of increasing importance
. Effluents discharged from industries 
involved in dying and bleaching, as well as increasi
ng use of fertilizers and pesticides, have had a 
major impact on surface water quality, soils and grou
ndwater.  For example, in the Noyyal river, 
a tributary of the Cauvery river, uncontrolled disch
arge of total dissolved solids have adversely affected agriculture as pollutants have contaminated water sources and soils.   
Overview of  Water Use in Agriculture 
 3.8 Most farmers own only irrigated land or
 non-irrigated land; few farmers own 
significant amounts of both irrigated and non-irrigated land
.  According to data from the 55
th round of the Indian National Sample Survey (N
SS), in 1999/00 approximately 25 percent of 
farms in Tamil Nadu used little or no irrigation; 
by contrast, 65 percent of farms consisted of 
almost entirely irrigated land.  Only about 10 percent of farms had significant shares (at least 20 
percent) of both irrigated and non-irrigated la
nd.  Thus, agricultural programs that focus on 
irrigated crops will generally not directly bene
fit 25 percent of farm households.  Similarly, 
                                                     
 20 Some of these basins, including the Cauvery,
 are partially located in neighboring states. 
 24programs that focus on non-irrigated crops will gene
rally not directly benefit the 65 percent of 
farm households with essentia
lly no non-irrigated land (
Figure  3.2,Table  3.2)  Figure  
3.2:  Area Cultivated by Sh
are of Irrigated Land Per Farm 
0102030405060
7080900-20%20-40%40-60%60-80%80-
100%Irrigated Area as a Share of 
Cultivated Area 
Thousand HectaresIrrigated
Non-irrigated
 Table 
 3.2:  Access to Irrigation by Farms 
Percent of Cultivated 
Area Irrigated Avera
ge share of 
irrigated land 
per farm (%) 
Distribution o
f Farms (%) 
Average Farm Size 
(Ha) 
0-20% 0.43 24.80 0.69 
20-40% 30.75 2.27 1.7 
40-60% 51.19 4.09 1.34 
60-80% 67.99 4.15 1.53 
80-100% 99.23 64.69 0.85 
    
Total 71.69 100.00 0.88 
Source:  Authors™ Calculations from the 55
th Round of the NSS (1999/00)
  Rainfed Agriculture 
 3.9 Rainfed agriculture accounts for 45 percent of the gross cultivated area of 6.5 million 
hectares in Tamil Nadu and approximately 25 percent of farmers in the state are engaged in 
rainfed agriculture. Despite its importance as a source of income and employment, productivity 
in rainfed agriculture has been low. Tamil 
Nadu has implemented a number of centrally 
sponsored and donor funded watershed devel
opment schemes aimed at improving the production 
potential of rainfed agriculture. These schemes 
include the Drought Prone Areas Programme 
(DPAP), the National Watershed Developmen
t Project for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA), the 
Integrated Wasteland Development Pr
ogramme (IWDP) and the DANIDA funded Comprehensive Watershed Development Projects.  
3.10 The DPAP implemented in Tamil Nadu since 
the early 1970s promotes natural resource 
management in watersheds so as to mitigate th
e adverse effects of drought, prevent further 
degradation and generate empl
oyment through non-farm activities. IWDP has the broad 
 25objectives of sustainability, equity and environm
ental conservation to meet timber, fodder and 
fuel needs and to increase employment opportun
ities for Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribes and 
other socio-economically disadvantaged groups. This
 program has been implemented in the state 
since 1993/94 in non-DPAP blocks. NWDPRA focu
ses on sustainable production of biomass and 
restoration of ecological balance in watershe
ds and has been operational since 1990-91. This 
initiative has recently been restru
ctured into the Watershed Areas Rainfed Agricultural Systems 
Approach  (WARASA). All of these programs are jointly funded by the Central government and 
GoTN, with the center responsible for at least 75 percent of the costs. 
3.11 The recently launched Comprehensive Wasteland Programme is a major initiative 
promoted by the GoTN which holds potential 
for improving water productivity in rainfed 
lands.  The program aims to reclaim current fallow wastelands through a micro watershed 
development program focusing on 
soil and water conservation. 
Roughly 17 percent of Tamil 
Nadu™s land area is classified as wastelands.
21 The program has two main components.  The first 
promotes participatory watershed 
development of  patta lands.
22  The second component seeks to 
encourage development of government owned wast
elands by corporate houses, small companies, 
cooperatives and Federations of Women™s Self Help Groups.  
3.12 Farmers participating in the participatory wa
tershed approach will receive a subsidy to 
partially cover costs for planting and irrigating 
horticultural and agro-forestry crops such as 
mangoes, cashew, sapota, tamarind, neem, silk 
cotton in the watersheds. The involvement of 
corporations in wasteland development will be
 encouraged by offering 30 year leases for 
wastelands of up to 1,000 acres to corporations that
 are interested in raising horticultural crops or 
bio-mass plantations on wastelands. Corpora
tions leasing land under this program will pay 
concessional amounts of rent proportional to land value for use of the land.   
3.13 Although watershed projects have been widely promoted throughout India the 
success of these projects in terms of curbing 
land degradation, improvi
ng the productivity of rainfed agriculture and reducing rural poverty has been limited
.  Reviews of watershed 
development programs in India have found that
 successful approaches to watershed development 
have entailed extensive community participation with sound technical inputs. The evidence also 
reveals that benefits of these projects have b
een skewed towards landowners, with landless people 
benefiting indirectly.  In some cases women and 
landless may have actually been made worse off 
as their access to common property resources may be restricted as a result of  project 
interventions. Adequately addressing these equity 
issues remains a challenge for governments and 
NGOs involved with implementing watershed projects.
 It has also been found that subsidies for 
soil and water conservation, and the opportuniti
es for employment, can induce farmers to accept 
soil conservation strategies that they do not really want and are hence difficult to sustain in the 

long run once the project ends (Kerr et al, 2002). 
 Tailoring conservation strategies to practices 
that farmers really want will be important in 
ensuring the success and long run sustainability of 
future initiatives.  For programs such as the Comprehensive Wasteland Programme, it is also 
important that the state adopts a basin perspective in implementation to ensure that these 
initiatives do not have negative impact
s on downstream human and ecological uses
.    3.14 Rainwater harvesting is being promoted on a large scale in the state in an effort to 
supplement ground water resources
. As much of the rainfall is received in a very short period, 
                                                     
 21 Wastelands include barren and uncultivable land, cultivable waste, permanent pastures and other grazing 
lands, other fallow lands, 50 per cent of current fallows and 40 per cent of dry land. 
 22 Private lands where owners are issued a Patta Pass Book 
 26rain water harvesting offers the ability to capture
 a transitory resource and can provide sufficient 
water to grow less water-intensive crops.
23 In urban areas, rainwater harvesting is a potential 
source of water for consumption purposes.  As of
 July, 2003, the Government of Tamil Nadu has 
passed an ordinance requiring all buildings in the state to install rainwater harvesting structures 
before the monsoon.   
 Irrigated Agriculture 
 3.15 Tamil Nadu has a net irrigated area of 3 million hectares (1999/00).  Most irrigated lands 
are only irrigated for a single season and the state™
s irrigation intensity of 121 percent is relatively 
low.24  Today the state is equally reliant on 
surface and groundwater sources for irrigation, although its reliance on groundwater sources has been steadily increasing (
Figure  3.3).  
Approximately 30 percent of the net irrigated ar
ea is irrigated by water from canals.  An 
additional 21 percent is irrigated by tanks, while 
wells are used to irrigate 49 percent of the net 
irrigated area. The remaining area is irrigated by other sources such as streams and springs. Net 

irrigated area has increased by about 10 percen
t in the past two decades from 2.7 million ha in 
1981/82, due mainly to a 39 percent increase in area
 irrigated by wells.  Over the same period, 
area irrigated by canals and tanks decreased 
by approximately 4 percent and 14 percent, 
respectively.  

 Figure  3.3:  Net Irrigated Area by Source of Irrigation 
-0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
1981-821991-921999-2000
Net Irrigated Area (Millions of Hectares)
Other
Wells
Tanks
Canals
     
Source:  CMIE Yearbook, Various Years 
Surface irrigation 
 3.16 Tamil Nadu has constructed more than 85 la
rge and medium dams since independence.  
As the surface irrigation potential has virtually been exhausted, mode
rnizing and rehabilitating 
existing systems is crucial to improve the efficiency of surface irrigation. The majority of canal 
systems in the state are old and have very poor 
efficiency as a result of seepage and silting in the 
canals (GoTN, 2001a).  In recent years the state 
has undertaken some major canal modernization 
projects with the aide of World Bank funding unde
r the Water Resources Consolidation Project.   
                                                      
 23 On average there are 30 rainy days during the southwest monsoon and 55 rainy days during the northeast 
monsoon.   
24 The all-India irrigation intensity is 132%.   
 273.17 In the 1960s, tank irrigation accounted for almost 37 percent of net irrigated area in 
Tamil Nadu. Area irrigated with tanks has steadily 
declined over time, however, because of 
siltation in tank beds and supply 
channels, encroachments in the 
tank bund, foreshore, and supply 
channels, and damaged sluices, weirs and bunds,. There are currently 41,948 tanks in the state of 
TN irrigating an area of 0.63 million hectares, the average area irrigated by a tank is 15.1 ha.  Due 
to water shortages a large number of tanks in the 
state are defunct.  A recent study found that in a 
10 year period, tanks are only full for 2 years, they are partially full for 5 years and fail for 3 out 

of 10 years. Water markets are becoming increasingly important in the tank command areas and 

provide a means to supplement inadequate tank i
rrigation water particularly at the end of the 
paddy season. Farmers normally spend about 20 percent of their rice crop income on buying 

water from well owners.  Since 
only 15 percent of farmers own wells in the tank command, 
demand for supplemental irrigation is high (Palanisami, 2003).   
Groundwater Irrigation  3.18 Factors including rural electrification, the availability of affordable irrigation pump sets 
and cheap or free electricity for agriculture 
have contributed to the increasing reliance on 
groundwater for irrigation in Tamil Nadu.  
Both the number of wells and area irrigated by them 
registered significant increases 
over the years. The number of wells (dug and tube wells) had 
increased from 1.68 million during 1981-82 to 1.83 million in 1999-2000, the area irrigated by them 
rose from 1.05 million ha. to 1.45 million ha. 
 3.19 Overexploitation of groundwater resources 
is a major problem facing the state. Of a total of 1.8 million wells in the state, approxima
tely 10 percent are now defunct. The depth of 
bore wells in hard rock area has increased to 
as much as 600ft to 1000ft.  Today, use of dug wells 
as a source of irrigation is only possible in canal
 and tank command areas; only bore wells remain 
operational in hard rock areas (mainly in the western part of the state).
25  Due to acute water scarcity the Government of Tamil Nadu has recen
tly announced its plans 
to ban the drilling of bore wells, particularly in hard rock areas. This
 however has had a perverse effect as farmers are 
rushing to drill additional wells before the ban 
is officially imposed. Spacing norms have been 
prescribed based on the guidelines issued by 
NABARD (National Bank for Agricultural and 
Rural Development). Dug wells must be at least 150 
m apart; deep tube wells must be at least 600 
m apart. These spacing norms for the construction 
of new structures for minor irrigation purposes 
are applicable throughout the state for wells that
 are constructed with the aide of institutional 
finance. Institutions  3.20 Institutional weaknesses undermined proper management and development of 
water resources in Tamil Nadu
. Institutional arrangements did 
not adequately address water 
resources management, allocation and planning.  
There has also been a lack of expenditure 
prioritization; inadequate priority to and fundi
ng for operations and ma
intenance (O&M) has led to rapid deterioration of surface irrigation. Farm
er involvement in the operation and maintenance 
of irrigation systems has been minimal. Recently, 
however, effort has been made to address many 
of the policy and institutional issues plaguing the water sector.  
3.21 The state is now undertaking 
comprehensive water planning on a river basin basis
 and 
has decentralized water resource management along 
river basins.  The Public Works Department 
has been divided into the 
Water Resources Organization (WRO) 
and the Buildings 
                                                     
 25 Personal communication with K. Palanisami (TNAU). 
 28Organization in 1995.
 The WRO is to be formalized as a separate agency with a specialized cadre 
of staff in 2004.
 Chief Engineers of the WRO have been reorganized along a river basin basis and 
Government Orders setting up the Palar Basin 
Development and Management Board and the 
Thambaraparani Basin Developm
ent and Management Board were issued in January, 2000. 
Preparation of macro-level basin development plans and formulation of decision support systems 
for development and management of the water 
resources of the state has been underway since 
1997.  
3.22 The state has also drafted a Water Policy and steps for irrigation management 
transfer have also been initiated
. The Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation Systems 
Bill was passed  by the State Legislative Assembly 
in May, 2000. The state was one of the first in 
India to pass a Groundwater Regulation and Management Act. Development of requisite skills in 
environmental aspects of water resources for staf
f in specified units of the Public Works 
Department has been a s
ubstantial achievement.  
Irrigation Management Transfer  3.23 Traditionally rural communities have played a 
central role in the management of water 
resources in Tamil Nadu. Informal arrangements 
under the system of ﬁkudimaramathu™ were 
widespread for the maintenance and management 
 of irrigation tanks up until the middle of the 
19th century. Various other spontaneously created fa
rmer organizations also played an important 
part in the management of canal systems, as well.    
3.24 Between 1988 and 1994 as part of the 
Command Area Development Programme, the 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural Engineering Department 
organized Water User Associations in five 
major systems. By 1994, 3,300 outlet level WU
As and 118 distributory canal level WUAs had 
been formed, though most were not functioning well (Brewer et al., 1999).  The motivation for 
formally transferring irrigation management to 
canal irrigation users in the state was largely 
driven by the pressure of maintaining canal syst
ems in a situation of fiscal stress, increasing  
inter-sectoral competition for water resources, 
and advice from the World Bank as part of the 
WRCP project.  3.25 To enable management transfer to farmers, the Tamil Nadu Farmers Management 
of Irrigation  Systems Bill was passed  by the State Legislative Assembly  in May, 2000
.   
This Act will be in force in an area coveri
ng 1.5 million hectares in the system command areas 
under the management and control of WRO.   
3.26 The Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation Systems' (FMIS) Bill created a three-
tier system management organization, including WUAs at the outlet, WUAs at the 500 hectare 
command levels and a joint management committe
e(JMC) (a committee including representatives 
of the WUAs and of key government agencies) at the project level.
26  The Bill also allows for the 
full or partial transfer of O&M responsib
ilities to these bodies.  Each WUA has complete 
responsibility for water distributio
n and maintenance in the area 
under its jurisdiction. The JMC 
is afforded the responsibility of deciding on wa
ter allocations and distribution each season and for 
solving problems as they arise.    
3.27 Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and evaluations 
of its impact  in Tamil Nadu are yet to be carri
ed out.  However, there is a growing body of 
evidence on the impact of IMT from other states in 
India which is likely to be relevant for Tamil 
                                                     
 26 The JMC™s are known as Farmer Councils 
 29A recent study undertaken by the International 
Water Management Institute (IWMI) and the 
Gujarat Institute of Development Research (GIDR)
 sheds some important insights into pro-poor 
IMT in large-scale canal irrigation systems.  The 
study is based on a survey of 700 landowning and 
tenant farmers from seven WUA™s in the two states. The study found that IMT in AP and Gujarat 
led to improved access to water for 15% and 25
% of farmers surveyed and extension of the 
irrigated area for 2% and 3% of farmers in the tw
o states, respectively. Ho
wever, the authors also 
find that poor farmers are less 
informed about their rights and tend to loose out on many of the 
potential benefits of IMT.   
 The report makes the following recommendations in terms of making IMT more pro-poor.   
 1. The rights of farmers need to
 be clearly defined.  Individual farmers within the WUA 
should have equal decision making power regardless of farm size. 
2. The awareness of poor farmers and access to 
information on the IMT process should be 
raised.  Differences in access to information 
between poor and wealthy farmers contribute 
to inequities. Wealthy farmers tend to be better informed of their rights and 

responsibilities as WUA members and participate more in the decision-making processes.  

Small farmers were more likely to be unaware 
of the existence of WUAs.  The absence of 
small farmers from committee and general mee
tings means that they are excluded from 
key decisions taken within the WUA including decisions on the use of funds, site 

selection for R&R (Resettlement and Rehabilitation), future self-management of water 
distribution etc.  
3. The election process within the WUA should be
 competitive and transparent.  Election of 
new presidents and committee 
members should be vote-based rather than consensus-
based, to promote competition between several candidates. 
4. The levels of participation (in WUA elections, decision-making processes, fee collection 

etc) by farm size and location should be monitored.. Farm size has proven to be a good 
indicator of relative wealth and monitoring 
participation by farm size provides a good 
indicator of equity trends.   
 Source:  van Koppen, Parathas
arathy and Safiliou, 2003. 
Nadu as WUAs and JMCs begin to play a larger 
role in the management of irrigation systems 
(Text Box  3.1).  
 Text Box 
 3.1:  Pro-poor Irriga
tion Management Transfer 
Water and Electricity Charges 
 3.28 Tamil Nadu has an extremely complicated system of water charges for surface 
irrigation compared to most Indian states
.  Currently there are 188 water rates  (133 for wet 
lands and 55 for dry lands) for farmers depe
nding on soil type, irrigation source, crop grown, 
season etc. Currently water rates  form part of 
the land revenue collected from farmers by village 
administrative officers.  Apart from the basic wa
ter rate there is a local cess and a local cess 
surcharge levied as a multiple of the basic water ra
te paid by farmers.  The revenue from the local 
cess and local cess surcharge is transferred to Panchayat bodies for general expenditures.  
3.29 At present the revenue department is involve
d in both assessments of water charges and 
collection.  The VAOs (village officials) are supposed to inspect the field and record the cropped area, the area under government sources of irrigati
on (e.g. canals, tanks, etc.) and crop conditions. 
A sample check is conducted by higher officials such as the Revenue Inspector/Deputy Tasildars.  
 30At the end of the agricultural year (fasli year),
 the accounts are prepared and water charges are 
collected along with the land revenue.  The my
riad of water rates provide considerable 
discretionary power to assessors.   
 3.30 Until recent revisions, water rates had been untouched since 1962
. Beginning in July 
2003, however, an additional water charge of Rs
 150/ha ,de-linked from any additional cess, was 
imposed.  Thus the farmer will pay the original ch
arge plus the Rs 150/ha.  In addition, the FMIS 
Act empowers the water users™ associations to ch
arge users between Rs 250/ha to Rs 500/ha.  
This additional charge can be retained by the 
WUA for operation and maintenance of the systems 
turned over to them. 

 
3.31 In 1999/00 total O&M expenditures on irriga
tion amounted to Rs 45.6 Crores.  Total 
revenue collected was roughly Rs 11 Crores. Henc
e cost recovery was less than 25 percent (
Table  3.3).    Table 
 3.3:  Irrigation Expenditures and Revenues (1998/99-2000/01) 
 Command
Area ('000 ha) 
O&M expenditures and 
Recoveries  
(Rs. Crore) 
O&M expenditures  
(Rs/ha)   98/99 99/00 00/01 98/99 99/00 00/01 
O&M Works Expenditures 
       
  Major 737.8 36.89 14.11 15.09 500 191 205 
  Medium 824.4 18.34 18.21 18.26 222 221 221 
  Minor  729.9 11.20 12.23 12.23 153 168 168 
  Total  2292.1 66.43 44.55 45.58 290 194 199 
Cost Recovery 
       
Recovery from major & medium  8.25 8.25 8.50    
Recovery from minor  2.63 2.60 2.49    
Total Recovery  10.88 10.85 10.99    
Cost recovery as percent O&M works  
expenditure  16% 24% 24%    
Sources: Expenditure data from WRO, GOTN; 
Revenue data from RBI Bulletin on State Fina
nces, Dec. 2000 as cited  in Palanisami, 
2002. 
 3.32 Low water charges and poor cost recovery
 has meant that canal irrigation users 
have received an implicit subsidy
. In 2000/01 the implicit irrigation subsidy (defined as the 
difference between O&M expenditures and actual co
llection of water charges) amounted to Rs 
333.5 million. Based on an estimated gross canal 
irrigated area of 0.87 million hectares this 
translates into a per hectare subsidy of  Rs 649.
27 3.33 The vast majority of rural households in Tamil Nadu do not benefit directly from 
canal irrigation subsidies; in fact only 7 percent of rural households (15 percent of 
households cultivating crops) enjoy these implicit subsidies
.  However, the distribution of 
canal irrigation subsidies among households that use canal irrigation is less regressive than in 

other major Indian states (World Bank, 2003a). 
In Tamil Nadu over 90 percent of farmers using 
canal irrigation are marginal and small farmers and these farmers capture approximately 76 
                                                     
 27 Exact data on gross canal irrigated area are not available.  Gross canal irrigated area is computed as the 
net canal irrigated area multiplied by the intensity of irrigation  (1.2062). 
 31percent of the canal irrigation subsidy. The aver
age subsidy received by households using canal 
irrigation in 2000/01 was Rs 493.67.  Owing to larg
er farm sizes, large farmers enjoy average 
subsidies that are more than four times as large 
as those enjoyed by marginal and small farmers  
(Table  3.4).   
 Table 
 
3.4:  Distribution of Canal Irrigation
 Subsidies in Tamil Nadu  (2001/02) 
Size of landholding 
Average 
farm size 
(Ha) 
% of Ag HHs 
using canals 
Distribution 
of HH using 
canals (%) 
Distribution 
of Canal 
Irrigated Area
Subsidy/HH 
(S1) 
All  0.96 15.4 100.0 100.0 493.7 
Marginal (<1 Ha) 0.47 12.6 81.8 52.2 314.9 
Small (1-<2 Ha) 1.33 1.9 12.4 24.1 957.4 
Medium (2-<4 Ha) 2.47 0.7 4.6 14.5 1561.74 
Large (>=10 Ha) 5.30 0.2 1.2 9.2 3885.9 
 Source:  Authors™ computations using the 54
th round of the NSS (1998). Households that
 cultivated crops anded own less than 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as marginal farmers, those owning 1 
to less than 2 Ha were classified as small farmers, those with
 2 and less than 4 Ha are classified as medium farmers.  Households 
owning 4 or more hectares are classified as large farmers.  
Note: HH indicates household.  Ag HH (agricultural house
holds) are any households that reported cultivating crops. 
Agricultural Power Tariffs 
 3.34 Until recently farmers pumping groundwater 
for irrigation with the use of electric 
pump sets have benefited 
from free electricity.  Free electricity for agricultural consumers 
coupled with irrigators not internalizing the envi
ronmental costs of their 
water use, has reduced 
incentives for conservation (encouraging over ex
traction of groundwater) and encouraged the 
cultivation of water-intensive crops. Provision of 
free electricity for agricultural power consumers 
has also contributed to the deteriorating finances of the state™s power sector affecting the 
economy™s growth and fiscal health.   
3.35 In Tamil Nadu, as in the rest of India, the electricity tariff charged from industrial and commercial consumers cross-subsidizes 
domestic and agricultural consumers
.  This policy has contributed to rapid expansion in consumption from subsidized categories and 
stagnation in consumption from subsidizing cat
egories (World Bank, 2003).  Industries, 
commercial users and even many domestic consumers 
have had to make large investments in self 
generation capability which is highly inefficient.
  This, along with the cross subsidy, has an 
impact on the competitiveness of the state™s industries and economy.  Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Board™s financial distress has contained its ab
ility to make investments, resulting in uneven 
quality of supply and generation shortages.  
3.36 Apart from these environmental and fiscal issues, the distribution of power 
subsidies to farmers is also a concern, since 
the subsidy reaches only the 16 percent of Tamil 
Nadu farmers who own pump sets. The vast majority of rural households have not benefited 
directly from agricultural power subsidies because they do not own electric pump sets. The 
majority of electric pump set owners are small and marginal farmers (79.4 percent), 14 percent 
are medium farmers and 6 percent are large farmers (
Table  3.5). 
28  It is important to note, 
                                                     
 28 Households that reported cultivating crops and own le
ss than 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as marginal 
farmers, those owning 1 to less than 2 Ha were classi
fied as small farmers, those with 2 and less than 4 Ha 
are classified as medium farmers.  Households owning 
4 or more hectares are classified as large farmers. 
 32though, that insufficient new investment and main
tenance have made rural electric supply erratic 
in many places.  Surveys in other states in Indi
a indicate that farmers would be willing to pay for 
electricity, provided that it was more reliable (World Bank, 2001). 
 3.37 In 2001/2002 agricultural power consumers 
in Tamil Nadu received a subsidy of Rs 
27.09 billion.29 According to available data, total official power consumption by agricultural 
consumers was 9,484 million Kwh and the average 
cost of supplying power to farmers was Rs 
3.05/Kwh. Although small and marginal farmers c
onstitute the majority of electric pump set 
owners in Tamil Nadu, medium and large farm
ers (representing 21 percent of all agricultural 
pump set owners) receive a disproportionately larg
e share of the total agricultural power subsidy 
compared to their representation in the population 
(i.e. while medium and large farmers represent 
21% of electric pumpset owners, they operate 
48 percent of the area irrigated by electric pump 
sets) (Table  3.5).30 Poor rural households in Tamil Nadu receive less than 17% of the agricultural 
power subsidy.  Table 
 3.5:  Distribution of Agricultural Po
wer Subsidies in Tamil Nadu (2001/02) 
Farm size 
Distribution of 
electric pump 
set owners (%) 
Distribution of 
area irrigated by electric pumps (%) 
Total subsidy 
received by Farm 
Size (Rs/year in 
Billions) 
Avera
ge subsid
y  per pump set 
owner (Rs/year) 
Marginal (<1 ha) 55.53 26.84 7.27 13,092.79 
Small (1-2 ha) 23.84 24.89 6.74 28,276.87 
Medium (2-4 ha) 14.1 24.66 6.68 47,371.37 
Large (>=4 ha) 6.53 23.62 6.4 97,972.53 
Total  100 100 27.09 27,090.00 
Source:  54
th round of the NSS (1998). Households that
 reported cultivating crops and own less than
 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as 
marginal farmers, those owning 1 to less than 2 Ha were classifi
ed as small farmers, those with 2 and less than 4 Ha are classi
fied as 
medium farmers.  Households 
owning 4 or more hectares are classified 
as large farmers. HH represents household
  3.38 In March 2003, The Tamil Nadu Electrici
ty Regulatory Commission (TNERC) 
notified its first tariff order, reducing the cross-subsidy on electricity with the introduction 
of an agricultural tariff
.  After 12 years of free power to farmers, the new tariff order has 
introduced a flat rate for unmetered connections
 of Rs.250 per HP per annum and a charge of 
Rs.0.20/kWh for metered connections. The gove
rnment also announced an income support 
scheme for small and marginal farmers.  This was 
a significant step toward creating a more direct 
and transparent system of subsidies to farmers a
nd other target groups and ensuring the separation 
                                                     
 29 Estimates from Rajesh Sinha. The cost of supp
ly excludes depreciation (a non-cash expenses).
 30 The analysis of agricultural power subsidies in 
Tamil Nadu presented is based on data from the 54
th round (1998) of the Indian National Sample Survey (NSS).
 30 This round of the NSS
 included a module on 
Common Property Resources, Sanitation and Hygiene whic
h contained information on cultivation practices 
of households, and the ownership and use of irrigation technology (electric pumps, diesel pumps, canals, 
and conjunctive sources) in
 cultivating five principal crops. By 
using the amount of area irrigated by 
electric pumps as a proxy for the benefits of subsidized
 electricity, these data can be used to examine the 
distribution of agricultural power subsidies across vari
ous landholding categories. In reality, in addition to 
farm size, power consumption by different groups of farmers is likely to depend on the water requirements 
of crops grown, the depth of the water table, and 
the availability, reliability and quality of the power 
supply. The magnitude of agricultural power subsidies goin
g to different land holding categories can be 
estimated by combining data on the ownership of electric pump sets, the distribution of area irrigated by 
electric pumps by land holding, and an estimat
e of the total agricultural power subsidy. 
 33of commercial operation of the power utility fr
om the need for subsidy. However, the 
reintroduction of agriculture power tariff became
 a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu during 
the recent national election, forcing the governme
nt which suffered severe electoral loss for the 
national parliament seats to reverse the policy. 
 3.39 Under the income support scheme, GoTN 
provided small and marginal farmers a 
transfer of up to Rs.1250 per year.  However, this disbursement 
was restricted to Rs.1000 in the case of small and marginal farmers owning pump sets of 3 HP capacity.   These farmers, 0.94 
million, accounted for about 57% of the agricultural 
connections or 12% of farmers.  This direct 
subsidy would have amounted to 
about Rs.1 billion for farmers. 
3.40 On June 10, 2003,  the Central government 
enacted the Electricity Act 2003 (Act) which 
replaces the earlier central laws on electricity viz. the Indian Electricity Act-1910, Electricity 

Supply Act-1948, and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act of 1998. The new act is 

expected to have a far reaching impact on the 
power sector in India (World Bank, 2003).  The 
provision for mandatory metering of supply of el
ectricity within two years will put pressure on 
States to meter agricultural consumers.  TNEB has started metering new agriculture connections 

since July 1, 2002.  Like rest of India, mete
ring the 1.65 million existing agricultural consumers 
in the state is politically challenging, and is exp
ected to take time.  However 100% metering is a 
mandatory requirement under the Act and an essential
 pre-requisite to improve the information on 
power supply and consumption.  
 Full metering of retail consump
tion along with bulk metering is 
also required to establish energy accountability among utility staff.  Metering of agriculture 

would be the first step towards better targeting of the agriculture subsidy based on actual 

consumption and provide better incentives for effi
cient usage of scarce water resources in Tamil 
Nadu.    The Impact of  Water, Agricultural Power 
and Fertilizer Subsidies on Incentives in TN 
Agriculture  3.41 Government policies have major effects on crop profitability in India
.  Trade policies (tariffs, export subsidies, and quantitative restric
tions) affect domestic market prices of local  
commodities that compete with international goods. 
 Moreover, agricultural-related subsidies (the 
national fertilizer subsidy, inadequate cost recove
ry in irrigation systems, electricity subsidies) 
and investments involve major public expenditures.     
3.42 In order to examine the impacts of major 
policies on incentives in agriculture, this 
section presents measures of crop profitability wi
th and without subsidies and other market 
distortions.  Given the importance of increasing water e
fficiency in agriculture, a major focus of 
the analysis is on the effects of changes in irriga
tion costs (water charges in canals and electricity 
charges for wells).  The impact of other major 
policies is also considered through estimates of 
crop productivity at economic prices (i.e. at pr
ices that reflect the opportunity cost of each 
resource).   3.43 The analysis is based on costs of cultiva
tion and crop budgets (average of 1999/2000 and 2000/01) as calculated from farmer surveys by th
e Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) 
for selected crops and sites.  These sites are chosen as representative of each crop under the 
irrigation system specified.  It should be noted th
at costs and returns of individual farmer fields 
depend on particular soil conditions
, local rainfall, farm management skills, and other factors.   
3.44 The amount of water used and its margin
al (operational) cost varies considerably 
across types of irrigation and crops
 (Table  3.6).  Sugar cane requires the most water (1800 
mms/unit area) and occupies the land essentially y
ear-round.  Paddy requires 135 mms/unit area 
in only 4 months. Cotton and groundnuts require le
ss than half the water of paddy.  Financial 
 34costs of irrigation to the farmer (not including capital costs) vary from about 289 Rs/ha for paddy 
under canal irrigation
31 to 1,250 Rs/ha (the annual tax on a 5 horsepower pump set) for sugar 
cane and banana.  (Pump set taxes for crops that
 are grown as part of a two-crop sequence are 
estimated as one half of the annual charges for pump sets, i.e. 625 Rs/ha.)  
3.45 Estimates of the full marginal cost of 
irrigation under meter charges vary more 
substantially, given the large variation in estimated electricity use
.  Electricity use for paddy 
irrigated solely with pumps is more than five 
times that of paddy irri
gated by tanks with only 
supplemental irrigation from pumps.  Likewise, est
imated electricity use for groundnut and cotton 
irrigation by pumps is only about half that for 
paddy given lesser water requirements.  Estimated 
economic costs of irrigation (excluding capital co
sts) for paddy irrigated by wells is about 10 
times the estimated economic costs of canal irriga
tion (4600 Rs/ha for pumps compared with 450 
Rs/ha for canals).32   3.46 Given variations in costs as well as value of
 output, net financial returns per hectare of rice, sugar cane, cotton and groundnuts unde
r various forms of irrigation range from 
9,849 Rs/ha for rice cultivation under tank and well irrigation to 17,956 Rs/ha for sugar 
cane with well irrigation (Table  3.7). These costs and financial returns of cultivation for irrigation with pumps are adjusted to include the tax on electric motors which is planned to take 
effect in late 2003.        
3.47 For well irrigation, the tax on pumpsets (a
djusted for the number of crops grown on 
the land) is equal to only 4.9 to 6.5 percent of
 net returns to land and management with no 
irrigation costs.  These figures represent the reduction in 
crop profitability in these systems if no 
direct payments are given to offset the new tax 
on pumpsets.  If a system of meters is used and 
electricity costs remain at 0.2 Rs/kw-hr, then elect
ricity charges as a percentage of returns to land 
and management with no irrgation costs actually falls to 0.8 to 2.3 percent.   

3.48 However, if electricity char
ges are raised to the estima
ted marginal economic price 
of electricity to agriculture of  3.05 Rs/Kwhr,
 electricity costs rise to about 4,600 Rs/ha for 
paddy and sugar cane, reducing returns to 
land and management by 35.9 percent for rice 
and 23.8 percent for sugar cane
.  Likewise, total returns to land,
 labor and capital (value added) 
falls sharply for paddy and sugar cane irrigated by
 wells when the cost of electricity for pumping 
is included.  If electricity is costed at its 
economic price, total income generated from cotton 
cultivation (23,949 Rs/ha) is 53 percent greater than that for rice.33   3.49 Full cost of electricity for pumping woul
d thus reduce profitability per hectare of 
rice in favor of cotton, groundnuts and other l
ess water-intensive crops
 (for which costs and 
returns are not calculated here).
  This does not imply that all, or even most of the land planted 
to rice would shift to these crops.  For example, 
current cotton area irrigated with wells is only 
about 62 thousand hectares, compared with an estimated 202 thousand hectares of rice irrigated 
with wells, but cotton may not be suited to all 
the rice land, because of drainage and other soil 
characteristics.  Marketing problems might slow shifts to other crops, as well.  Nonetheless, 

charging full cost for electricity would seriously
 change the incentives for rice production, and 
                                                     
 31 Canal water charges are those for the Cauvery delta. 
32 For pumps, the economic cost of el
ectricity is assumed to be 3.1 Rs
/kw-hour.  For can
als, the economic 
cost of water is assumed to be 450 Rs/ha.  Note that
 these figures do not include the cost of capital of the 
pumps, however. 
33 Note that if the farmer hires outside labor or rents the land, farm income will be less than total value 
added. 
 35promote water conservation. Water thus saved w
ould be available for more productive uses either 
in agriculture, for household consumption, or industrial use. 
 36Table 
 
3.6:  Irrigation Costs by Crop and Type of Irrigation 
 Crop Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar
 Cotton Groundnut Bananas 
Form of Irrigation canal tank/well Well well well well well 
        
Crop duration (months) 4 4 4 11 6 4.5 10.5 
Water Use (mms/ha) 1350 1350 1350 1800 650 500 1800 
Months w/ irrigation 4 1 3 11 6 4.5 10.5 
Frequency of irrigation  1/6 days 1/3 days
 1/10 days 1/8 days 1/6 days 1/7 days 
Number of irrigations  5 40 33 22.5 22.5 45 
Hours/irrigation (for 1 ha)  14 10 12 8 10 10 
Total hours of irrigation/ha  70 400 396 180 225 450 
Energy consumption (kw-hrs/ha/season) --- 261 1,492 1,477 671 839 1,679 
Full Irrigation costs (Rs/ha) 450 809 4,625 4,579 2,081 2,602 5,203 
Actual canal/electricity charges (Rs/ha) 289 625 625 1,250 875 625 1,250 

Subsidy on irrigation (Rs/ha) 161 184 4,000 3,329 1,206 1,977 3,953 
       - 
Crops of all kinds / year 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 

Second crop paddy non-rice gnuts/ma
ize ------ pulses maize/other ------ 
        
Notes:        
Electricity cost (Rs/kwhr) 3.1       
Horsepower of pump 5       
Kilowatt/horsepower 0.746       
        
Tanks with wells: Tank water used for 3 months; well water for 1 month.      
Canal irrigation fees: Land revenue: 1-2 Rs/acre (2.5-5.0 Rs/ha); 
rice water charge to irrigati
on dept: 15 Rs/acre (37.5 Rs/ha)
;   
  2 cesses (500 + 100%) of (land tax plus rice water 
charge); total = Rs 280 to 297.5 / hectare.    
Source: AgroStat 2001; K. Palinasami, TNAU Water Resource Center.         
 37 3.50 Fertilizer is also subsidized: farmer prices of urea, di-ammonium phosphate (DAP) and 
potash (K20) are 33, 5 and 48 percent below estimated border prices, respectively.
34  These 
subsidies significantly affect profitability: estimated
 fertilizer subsidies per hectare range are 810 
to 914 Rs/hectare for paddy and 2408 Rs/hectare for s
ugar cane (Table 3.8), equivalent to 6.6 to 
9.3 percent of net financial returns for paddy a
nd 13.4 percent of net fina
ncial returns for sugar 
cane. 3.51 Total input subsidies (both irrigation and f
ertilizer) thus account for 32.0 percent of 
net financial returns (calculated with a flat rate
 cost of electricity/irrigation) of sugar cane 
and 39.2 percent of net financial returns to paddy under well irrigation.
  The share of total input subsidy for other crops is much smaller: (9
.5 to 15.2 percent).  Net returns for cotton and 
groundnuts at economic prices of fertilizer and 
water are about 13,600 Rs/hectare, 1.9 times higher than those of paddy cultivated with well i
rrigation and 1.27 times higher than sugar cane. 
3.52 Current charges for irrigation (electricity co
sts) for paddy cultivated with tubewells 
in Tamil Nadu (Rs 625/ha) are less than irrigatio
n costs per hectare of paddy cultivated in 
other major rice producing states in India (Figure 3.4).
  These electricity costs are only two-
thirds average irrigation costs in Andhra Pradesh and 45 percent of irrigation costs in Punjab.  If 
full costs of irrigation were charged for tubewells, in Tamil Nadu (Rs 4,625/ha) , however, these 
costs would be 2.3 and 3.4 times the irrigation cost
s per hectare of paddy cultivated in Punjab and 
Haryana, respectively.   
3.53 Comparisons of gross profits per hectare of rice cultivation between Tamil Nadu 
and other states nonetheless suggest that there 
is ample scope for a moderate increase in 
electricity charges.
  Gross profits per hectare of rice cu
ltivation using C1 costs (i.e. returns to 
land and management) for Tamil Nadu (well irri
gation) are 5.3 percent higher than the AP 
average.  Charging a flat rate cost for electri
city/pump makes returns for TN/wells essentially 
equal to average returns for AP (12,261 vs 12,242 Rs/ha).  Charging full irrigation/electricity 
costs for TN/wells reduces returns to 8260 Rs/ha, comparable to West Bengal (8,279 Rs/ha).
35                                                      
 34 Border prices of fertilizer are calculated using 
the 2010 World Bank Commodity forecasts for world 
prices (expressed in 2002 prices) and the December 
2002 nominal exchange rate.  Freight and marketing 
costs are from Gulati and Narayanan (2003, Table A3.2).   
35 Yields in Tamil Nadu are below those of AP and Punjab (4.0-4.1 tons/ha versus 4.8 and 5.1 tons/ha), but 
average output price in Tamil Nadu is 
higher than AP (5.9 vs 5.5 Rs/kg) and especially Punjab (4.8 Rs/kg).  
Varietal differences account for some 
of the price difference.  Note that measures of financial returns are 
greatly influenced by output prices and yields which may vary from year to year. 
 38 Table 
 
3.7:  Financial and Economic Returns by Crop and Type of Irrigation 
  Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar CaneCotton Groundnuts 
 Canal Tank-well Well Well Well Well 
  (Madurai)(Tirunaveli)(Vellore
)(Madurai) (Madurai) (Coimbatore)
       
Area (thousand hectares, 1999-2000) 1,411 403 202 316 62 265 
Water Use (mms/ha) 1,350 1,350 1,350 1,800 650 500 

Total Water Use (ha-cms) 190,512 54,432 27,216 56,880 4,030 13,250 
       

Flat Rate Electricity/Water Charges (Rs/ha) 289 914 625 1,250 875 625 
Meter Electricity Charge (current rate, Rs/ha)            -    341 298 295 134 168 
Economic Cost Electricity/Water 
(Rs/ha) 450 1,259 4,625 4,579 2,081 2,602 
Average Economic Cost Water 
(Rs/cm) 3.3 9.3 34.3 25.4 32 52 
       
Financial Returns (flat rate, Rs
/ha) 11,113 9,849 12,261 17,956 16,180 16,827 
Financial Returns (w/ electricity 
meter, Rs/ha)           -    10,422 12,587 18,911 16,921 17,285 
Financial Returns (econ cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 10,952 9,504 8,260 14,627 14,974 14,851 
Economic Returns (econ cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 10,056 8,589 7,451 10,723 13,648 13,619 
       
Flat rate irrig cost/Fin return (no irrig 
charge) 2.50% 8.50% 4.90% 6.50% 5.10% 3.60% 
Meter elect cost/Fin return (no irrig 
charge)  3.20% 2.30% 1.50% 0.80% 1.00% 
Economic cost irrig/Fin return (no irrig 
charge) 3.90% 11.70% 35.90% 23.80% 12.20% 14.90% 
       
Value Added (flat rate cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 18,574 17,357 19,665 31,097 25,155 25,802 
Value Added (econ cost irrig, 
Rs/ha) 18,412 17,012 15,664 27,768 23,949 23,826 
VA (flat rate cost irrig)/water us
e (Rs/mm) 13.76 12.86 
14.57 17.28 38.7 51.6 
VA (econ cost irrig)/water use 
(Rs/mm) 13.64 12.6 11.6 15.43 36.84 47.65 
Labor VA 7,461 7,508 7,404 13,141 8,975 8,975 
       
Source: TNAU Crop Survey cost of production and yield 
data for 1999/2000 and 2000/01;
 TN Water CGE model.  
       
Notes:       
Flat rate for electricity denotes charge for 5 h.p. pump set; 
flat rate for water denotes wate
r charges and other taxes for can
als.   Economic cost of electricity and water 
include only operating and maintenance co
sts, not full depreciation of capital. 
Average economic costs of water calculated as water use (mms
/ha) divided by economic cost electricity/water (Rs/ha). 
Average economic costs of water are low in canals and ta
nks since much of water supplied by surface water.  
Economic returns figures include only temporary adjustment
s to output prices, and no adjustment to input prices. 
Add tank costs to flat rate.             
  39Table 
 
3.8:  Estimated Input Subsidies for Various Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2000-01 
  Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar Cane Cotton Groundnuts 
 Canal Tank-well Well Well Well Well 
  (Madurai) (Tirunaveli) (Vellore
) (Madurai) (Madurai) (Coimbatore)
       
Irrigation charges 
(flat rate, Rs/ha) 
289 914 625 1,250 875 625 
Irrigation subsidy 
(relative to full 
cost, Rs/ha) 161 346 4,000 3,329 1,206 1,977 
Irrigation subsidy / 
financial returns 
(w/ flat rate) 1.50% 3.50% 32.60% 18.50% 7.50% 11.70% 
Fertilizer cost 
(Rs/ha) 2,597 2,651 2,347 6,981 2,673 1,688 
Fertilizer subsidy 

(Rs/ha) 1,148 1,172 1,038 3,904 1,326 1,232 
Fertilizer subsidy / 
financial returns 
(w/ flat rate) 10.30% 11.90% 8.50% 21.70% 8.20% 7.30% 
Total input subsidy 
/ financial returns 
(w/flat rate) 11.80% 15.40% 41.10% 40.30% 15.60% 19.10% 
Economic Returns 
(econ cost irrig, 
Rs/ha) 9,803 8,332 7,222 10,723 13,648 13,619 
Note:  Fertilizer subsidy calculation based on estimated nominal 
protection coefficient for urea, 
DAP and K20 estimated at 0.67
, 0.95 
and 0.52, respectively following Gulati and 
Narayanan (2003) and World Bank 2010 commod
ity price projections. Economic cost of 
electricity and water include only 
operating and maintenance costs, 
not full depreciation of capital. 
  Technology  3.54 The prevailing water scarcity in Tamil Nadu has provided impetus for the adoption 
of drip and sprinkler irrigation technology
. Today the state along with Maharashtra is one of 
the leading adopters of drip irrigation technology in India.  In 2002, 72,816 hectares in Tamil 
Nadu (slightly more than 1 percent of net sown
 area) was cultivated under drip and sprinkler 
irrigation (GoTN, Agriculture Policy Note, 2003-04).  These water-saving technologies are 
primarily used for horticultural, fruit and flow
er crops including Coconut, Grapes, Banana, 
Cashew, Citrus, Guava, Mango, Pomegranate, Sa
pota. The potential water savings from the use 
of drip irrigation as opposed to conventional well 
irrigation have been estimated to be large, 
ranging from 39 percent for tomatoes to as much as 68 percent for papaya  (Muthuchamy, 
Palanisami and Rajagoapl, 2000).  The government 
is also trying to promote the use of drip 
irrigation for sugar cane cultivated under private mills. 
 3.55 The cost of  a micro-irrigation system depends on the crop, spacing, water 
requirements and the distance from the water source
. The cost of installing drip irrigation is 
estimated to range from Rs 20,000 to Rs 25,000 
per hectare for wide spaced crops such as coconut and mangos to Rs 60,000 to 75,000 for cl
ose spaced crops such as sugarcane, cotton, 
vegetables etc.     The high capital cost of dr
ip irrigation poses a constraint to widespread 
 40adoption by marginal and small fa
rmers although the use of this technology has been encouraged 
though the provision of centrally funded subsidies to farmers. 
Environmental Management 
 3.56 An environmental action plan (EAP) has been drawn up with the aim of fully 
integrating environmental management in pl
anning, investment and management of the State's water resources
. A key element of the EAPs was 
to strengthen WRO's environmental 
monitoring and analysis capabilities via the creati
on of specialist Environmental Units/Cells. Two 
such units have been established in the main pl
anning departments (basin- and project-level). 
   Figure  3.4:  Irrigation Costs for Rice Cultivation in India (Rs 1999-2000/ha) 
-5001,000
1,500

2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500

4,000
4,500
5,000
TN WellsTNWells*A.Pradesh
HaryanaPunjab
W.Bengal
Irrigation Costs/ha * Indicates irrigation costs at economic price of electricity. 
  Figure  3.5:  Irrigation Costs and Gross Profits for Rice Cultivation in India 
-2,000
4,000
6,000

8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
TNcanals
TN tanksTN Wells
A.Pradesh
HaryanaPunjab
W.Bengal
Rupees (1999-2000) / haProfit (using C1 Costs)/ha
Irrigation Costs / ha
  414. Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Irrigation 
 4.1 Agriculture related public expenditures in
 Tamil Nadu (expenditures on agriculture 
and allied activities and irrigation) as a share of agricultural GSDP are higher than most 
major agricultural states in India (World Bank, 2003b)
. These expenditures (both capital and 
revenue) totaled Rs 17 Billion in 2002/03. Be
tween 1998-2000 agricultural expenditures have 
accounted for approximately 11 percent of to
tal Agricultural GSDP in Tamil Nadu; the 
comparable figure across Indian states was 7.8 percent.
36 In Tamil Nadu agriculture related 
capital expenditures are relatively low compared 
to the all-India average, although revenue 
expenditures as a share of Agricultural GSDP 
are significantly higher than most major 
agricultural states in India. This is a situation 
for concern since capital investments are important 
for future growth, furthermore a large share of 
revenue expenditures are incurred on staff salaries 
and the food and irrigation subsidies 
leaving operating expenses under funded. 
4.2 In 2002 capital expenditures on agriculture and allied activities and irrigation 
accounted for 4.3 percent and 13.5 percent of the total capital outlay of  Rs 22.1 billion in 

Tamil Nadu, respectively
.  Of a total revenue expenditure of Rs 268.62 billion approximately 5 
percent  (Rs 13.02 billion) was spent on agricultu
re and allied activities and 1.5 percent was spent 
on irrigation and flood control (Rs 3.96 billion)
. Total expenditures (capital and revenue 
expenditures) on agriculture and allied activities 
during the 1990s exhibited a slight downward 
trend with an average annual growth rate of Œ1.1 percent while total expenditures on irrigation 
have grown at an average annual rate of 6.2 percent (
Figure  4.1:). Gross capital formation in 
agriculture increased by 15 percent in during th
e 1990s and this growth was primarily due to 
private capital formation which grew by almost
 16 percent between 1989/90  and  1998/99.   
 Figure  4.1: Total Expenditures (Capital 
and Revenue) on Agriculture and Irrigation 
024681012141618201990-91
1991-92
1992-93
1993-94
1994-95
1995-96
1996-97
1997-98
1998-99
1999-00
2000-01
Year
Rs Billion (Constant 1993-94 Rs)
        Agriculture and Allied Activities  
Irrigation
 Source:  World Bank, Indian States Database 
                                                      
 36Agricultural public expenditures as a share of e
xpenditures on Economic Serv
ices and Agricultural 
GSDP are averages of data from 1998/99-2000/01. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  42Figure  4.2:  Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) in Agriculture 
02
46810121416
181989199019911992199319941995199619971998
Rs Billion (Constant 1993/94 Rupees)
Total Agricultural GFCF
Public GFCF
Private GFCF
      4.3 During the 1990s, the share of agricultura
l and allied expenditures devoted to crop 
husbandry has declined, while expenditures on
 animal husbandry, dairy development and 
agricultural research and education have increased
. In 2001 expenditures on crop husbandry 
represented the single largest category of e
xpenditures on agricultural and allied activities accounting for approximately 45 percent of expenditures (
Table  4.1).  Expenditures on animal 
husbandry, dairy development and agricultural resear
ch and education averaged  8.8 percent, 3.2 
percent and 7.1 percent of total expenditures on agriculture and allied activities, respectively. 
Real expenditures on crop husbandry have decrease
d by an average annual rate of 2.4 percent 
during the 1990s, while expenditures on dairy de
velopment, agricultural research and education 
and irrigation have increased by an average annual 
rate of 12 percent, 4.2 percent and 6 percent, 
respectively. 
 Table  4.1:  Breakdown of Expenditures on 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1997-2001) 
  1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1993-94 Rs Billion) 9.711.014.29.39.1
Share of Expenditures (%)      
Agriculture (Crop Husbandry) 64.460.868.653.344.8
Soil and Water Conservation 2.83.42.63.85.7
Animal Husbandry 7.27.85.97.98.8
Dairy Development 0.61.01.33.03.2
Fisheries 2.12.41.52.12.7
Forestry and Wild Life 8.610.98.413.513.3
Plantations 0.00.00.00.00.0
Food Storage and Warehousing 0.10.10.00.00.0
Agriculture and Research Education 5.85.25.77.87.1
Co-operation 7.27.05.011.016.9
Other Agricultural services 2.62.01.52.42.4
       Source: Authors™ calculation using data
 from  GoTN, Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal, 1999-2000, Chapter 3, p. 23  
Source:  World Bank, India -States Database 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  43Tamil Nadu™s Public Distribution System  4.4 Tamil Nadu™s Targeted Public Distribution Sy
stem (TPDS) is one the  central pillars of the state™s strategy to ensure food security
.  Under the TPDS, eligible households can purchase 
a specified amount of  food grains and other essential commodities at subsidized prices from a 
network of public distribution outlets, known as Fa
ir Price shops, throughout the state.  Of the 18 
GoI essential commodities, four commodities na
mely, rice, wheat, sugar and kerosene are 
supplied through the public distribution system (PDS) in TN.  Ooty tea and Iodised salt are also 

sold through the PDS in the state. Beginning in July 2002, TN introduced some significant 
reforms to its PDS to address fiscal concerns 
the main elements of which included a coupon 
system to eliminate leakages, decentralized procur
ement, and restructuring of the issue price of 
rice.   4.5 Although substantive PDS reforms were undert
aken between 2002 to 2003, these reforms 
have recently suffered a setback. Rice coupons 
introduced to reduce the number of households 
eligible for PDS rice have been abolished by th
e GoTN after the national election in April-May 
2004. Income criteria to determine PDS e
ligibility have also been withdrawn. 
4.6 Coverage of TPDS in Tamil Nadu has been significantly higher than in the majority of 
Indian states.  In 1999/00 85 percent of BPL house
holds in Tamil Nadu were estimated to use the 
TPDS, a 14% increase since 1993/94.  The propor
tion of APL households accessing TPDS is also 
high in Tamil Nadu with approximately 66%
 of APL households accessing TPDS shops in 
1999/00 (Deininger, Umali-Deininger and Tritah, 2003). 

4.7 Under the TPDS system operating in TN (t
hrough August 2003), households had the option 
of  drawing rice from the PDS or additional quantitie
s of sugar or kerosene in lieu of rice.  Based 
on the family™s choice, a different colored 
family card is issued.  As of March 2003, 
approximately 16 million family cards had been i
ssued in the state of which 84.7 percent were 
rice cards (pink cards), 8.1 percent were kerosen
e cards (yellow cards), 7 percent were sugar 
cards (yellow cards) and 0.2 percent were kero
sene cards issued to police (khaki cards). 
Approximately 4.6 percent of households in the 
state qualified under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
(AAY), a scheme sponsored by the Government of India which targets the poorest households in 
the state enabling them to draw food grains at 
a specially subsidized ra
te specified by GoI. 
4.8 As part of its reform efforts the GoTN ha
d attempted to reduce the number of bogus cards 
that had come into circulation in the state by introducing a coupon system for drawing rice from 

the PDS. Twelve million rice card holders were 
issued coupons. Coupons were only issued to the 
person whose photograph has been affixed to th
e family card. The coupon as well as the family 
card were needed to withdraw rice.   
4.9 Each rice cardholder was entitled to draw 
a specified quantity from the PDS system depending on their family size
.  The maximum monthly issue amount was 20 Kgs for a family 
with ﬁ3 or more unitsﬂ. 37 Families that opted for a yellow card were eligible for an additional 3 
Kgs of sugar or 5 litres of kerosene per month in lieu 
of rice.  In the Nilgiris district, card holders were entitled to an additional 4 Kgs of rice per 
month in addition to the normal entitlement.  All 
AAY households were eligible to draw 35Kgs of rice per month irrespective of family size.   
4.10 Family cardholders in the city and district headquarters could draw 10 Kg of wheat and 
those in rural areas could draw 5Kg each month 
in addition to the rice entitlement.  Each family 
cardholder was also eligible to receive 500 gram
s per head up to a maximum of 2 Kgs per card 
per month.  Those who opted for yellow cards we
re entitled to an additional 3 Kg of sugar per 
                                                     
 37 An adult counts  for 1 unit while a child is counted as ½ an unit.   
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  44month in addition to their regular entitlement. Ke
rosene was supplied to cardholders on the basis 
of the number of LPG connections they had and wa
s also supplied to some public institutions and 
hospitals through the PDS system.   
4.11 Food grains in the public distribution system are sold to the public through a network of 
Fair price shops that are run by the TN Civil S
upplies Corporation. Private traders are not allowed 
to operate these shops. Each revenue village has a 
fair price shop and the government™s policy is 
to try to ensure that no card holder should  have
 to walk more than 2 km to reach a fair price 
shop.  There is an additional stipulation that th
e maximum number of cards attached to a shop 
should not exceed 800 in urban areas and 500 in rural 
areas.  In very remote areas, or areas where 
the existing fair price shops has to serve more 
than the maximum stipulated number of family 
cards, women™s groups are allowed to distribute PDS commodities. 
4.12 The PDS rice requirement is met through allotm
ents made by the GoI (allotment from the 
Central Pool) and paddy procurement within th
e state. In October 2002 the state adopted a 
decentralized procurement system under whic
h the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation 
procures rice on behalf of FCI at the Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the GoI.  TNCSC 
procures paddy by opening Direct Purchase Centr
es in the Cauvery Delta Area and through taluk 
godowns in other areas, on behalf of the GoI. The pa
ddy that is procured is  converted into rice by 
the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation, stored 
in its godowns and issued in the PDS outlets.  
TNCSC adheres to the  quality norms of FCI a
nd the paddy procured by the state may be re-
allotted to the state as part of the GoI allotment to the state.  The difference between the central 
issue price and the economic cost of rice (set by 
GoI) is reimbursed to the state for the central 
pool allocation of rice. If the quantity procured falls short of the allocation from the central pool 

the balance will be allocated from the central pool 
and if the quantity procured is in excess of the 
requirement for the PDS it will be taken over to the central pool. 
4.13 In 2002/03 the GoI allocation to the state was 495 thousand tons per month.  The 
allocation varies by month and the allocation from th
e central pool is more than adequate to meet 
the requirement of rice under the PDS .  The ce
ntral issue price of rice under TPDS is Rs. 5.65 
per kg of BPL rice and Rs. 8.30 per kg for  APL rice.  The GOI also allows states to charge an 
additional 50 paise per kg to cover costs of trans
portation, storage cost etc.  The economic price 
of rice  obtained by the TN CSC is approximately Rs 12 per kg. As of October 1, 2002 the state 
has adopted a two tier-pricing system for issuing rice whereby the first 10 kgs of rice is sold for 
Rs 3.50 per kg,  any amount above 10 kg is sold for Rs 6 per kg.  The PDS issue price of rice for 

AAY families is Rs 3 per kg.   4.14 Sugar required for the PDS is met out of the 
allotment of levy sugar by the GoI and by 
purchases of non-levy sugar from Tamil Nadu Co-ope
rative Sugar Federation.  For Kerosene the 
state is restricted to the allocation made by th
e GoI.  GoI supplies APL wheat to Tamil Nadu at 
Rs 6.10 per kg.  As of July 2002, TN has been
 selling this wheat though its PDS system at Rs 
7.50 per kg.  The retail price of sugar issued through the PDS was  Rs 13.50 per kg.  If the state 
has to procure non-levy sugar to meet requirements,
 the state government has to bear the costs.  
The issue price of kerosene was Rs 8.40-Rs 9 pe
r litre.  GoI recommends that the issue price 
under the PDS should be between Rs 9-Rs 9.60. 
 The difference in cost is met by the GoTN. 
4.15 As a result of the reforms of the pub
lic procurement system, the GOTN had 
estimated that the food subsidy would be 
dramatically reduced from Rs.1500 crore in 
2001/02 to projected Rs.700 crore in 2003/04, a reduction of Rs. 800 crore
.  Cessation of local 
procurement (except on behalf of the FCI) reduced government expenditures on procurement by 
eliminating the costs of the extra procurement in
centives paid and the costs of milling the paddy 
into rice.  State procurement of paddy in 
2000/01 and 2001/02 were 2.
61 and 1.24 million tons, 
respectively, (equivalent to 1.75 and 0.83 million t
ons of rice).  For this procurement the paid 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  45incentives and ﬁincidental chargesﬂ of Rs. 350 to 
400 per ton (a bonus of about 7.2 percent of the 
GOI procurement price of fine rice).  In total, these costs were approximately Rs 101 crore in 
2000/01 and Rs 50 crore in 2001/02 (Table 4.2).  
4.16 The bulk of the savings on food subsidies, however, were achieved through 
reduction in number of cards (and ultimately the sales of rice), and in the subsidy per 
kilogram of rice sold
.  Total ration sales dropped from 2.10 million tons in 2000/01 to 1.62 
million tons in 2002/03.   In addition the unit s
ubsidy paid by the GOTN fell by 64 percent from 
Rs. 5.13 /kg to Rs/ 1.85 as the average sales price 
rose from Rs 3.0/kg to an
 estimated Rs 4.07/kg, 
and the average cost of rice from the GOI fell 
from Rs 8.13/kg to Rs. 5.92/kg.  (This reduction in 
the average cost was due to an increase in the a
llocation of BPL rice and a lowering of the cost of APL rice.)  Thus, the    reduction in the subsidy 
due to reforms in distribution was about Rs 7.79 
billion (Rs 779 crore).  The total estimated reduction in subsidy (combined 
effect of reforms on 
procurement and distribution) was thus about 
Rs. 8.80 billion (Rs 880 crore), (Table 4.3). 
4.17 Effective 1 September 2003, the two-tiered pricing of rice according to the amount of 
ration purchased was scheduled to e
nd, with the entire ration to be so
ld at Rs. 3.5/kg.  As a result, 
if the quantity sold through ration shops remains at an average of 135 thousand tons per month, 
revenues will fall (and the subsidy will incr
ease) by Rs 0.93 billion (Rs 93 crore or about $21 
million), equivalent to 11 percent of the total s
ubsidy reduction of Rs. 8.
80 billion, shown above.  
If quantity of rice sold per card rises to 16 kgs/
card, the increase in costs relative to 2002/03 
would be Rs. 3.74 crore (about $84 million). The 
implications of the most recent policy reforms 
following the national election in April-Ma
y 2004 remain to be examined.   
Agricultural Extension  4.18 The agricultural extension system in TN is still organized around a modified 
Training and Visitation (T&V) extension approac
h, but with reduced levels of in-service 
training and fewer farmer visits
.  It is important to note that T&V Extension projects only 
strengthened the Department of Agriculture™s 
(DOA) extension system; extension programs in 
the other line departments, including Horticu
lture (DOH), Animal Husbandry (DAH), Fisheries 
(DOF), etc., were not improved.  Therefore, 
Tamil Nadu™s basic, multip
le agency extension 
structure remaining largely intact since the introduction of T&V Extension in the 1980s.  In short, 
each line department is still responsible for its
 own extension staff and programs, with little 
coordination at any level.  Also, since state government funding primarily goes for salaries and 
personal emoluments, most extension activities 
across all line departments are funded through 
ﬁtop-downﬂ central government schemes, plus ot
her subsidy and incentive programs that the 
extension field staff are expected to implement. 

 
4.19 New agricultural development priorities in Tamil Nadu are likely to bring about 
changes in the extension system
.  The GOTN has recognized the income generating and value-
added possibilities of the horticulture, sericulture, 
livestock and fisheries sectors.  In the Tenth 
Plan period there is an emphasis on horticultu
ral development, including agro-processing and 
marketing.  For example, the districts of Dhar
mapuri (Hussur), Nilgiri (Ooty) and Madurai have 
been earmarked for mango development, both fo
r processing and export.  The Agriculture and 
Processed Foods Export Development Authority (APEDA) is assisting the state in this venture.  
In addition, the GOTN plans to strengthen research
 and extension for the development of other horticultural crops, including fruit, 
vegetable and floriculture crops, plus cashews and medicinal 
plants.  This program is expected to focus on the organization and management of new supply 

chains, including domestic and export market de
velopment and investigating the feasibility of 
different types of value-added processing.  Since the GOTN has very limited extension capacity 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  46for horticulture development, it plans to li
nk agricultural, horticulture and agricultural 
engineering extension systems/units.  
 Table  4.2:  Estimates of th
e Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Costs of Rice Procurement  
 GOIGOTN IncentiveGOTN
Year and Rice Season QuantityProc. Price
aIncentive
b (% of Proc.Subsidy
 (th. Tons)(Rs/ton)(Rs/ton) Price)(mn Rs)
  2000 Samba (23/12/99 to 20/03/00)
c     1,085             5,200  470 9.0%             510  
      

2000 Samba (21/3/00 to 30/6/00)          82      
       5,200  350 6.7%               29  
      
2000 Kuruvai (1/9/00 to 15/12/00)        550             5,400  350 6.5%             193  

      
2001 Samba (16/12/00 to 1/9/01)     1,974             5,400  400 7.4%             790  

      

2001 Kuruvai (15/10/01 to 15/12/01)        223             5,600  400 7.1%               89  

      

2002 Samba (1/1/02 to 11/4/02)     1,019       
      5,600  400 7.1%             408  
      

      

FY 2000-01 (est.)     2,606             5,400  388 7.2%          1,011  

      

FY 2001-02 (est.)     1,242             5,600  400 7.1%             497  

      
Note:  Samba and kuruvai denote the two rice crop seasons 
in the Cauvery delta region of Tamil Nadu.  
a Fine or super fine quality.  
b Incentives include "incidental charges" paid to sellers of paddy. 
c Assumes 80 
percent of procurement in Cauvery delta areas with 500 Rs/ton incentive and 20 percent of procurement in 
non-delata areas with 350 Rs/ton incidental charge. Procurement in this period was monopoly procurement; 
thereafter, all procurement was parallel (non-monopoly) procurement.  
Source:  Government of Tamil Nadu 2002.  Cooperation, Food and Consumer Protection Department, 
Policy Note 2002-03 (Demand No. 12).
   47Table  4.3:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Fiscal Costs of Rice Distribution 
Year   2000/012000/012000/012000/01
Channel / Source of Rice  BPLAPLGOTNTotal
   
  (1) Number of cards million    13.5

  (2) Distribution '000 tons        1,131             79           890         2,100  
  (3) Unit cost of rice to GOTN
a Rs/kg 5.6511.3011.008.13
  (4) Estimated cost of procurement to GOTN, (2)*(3) bn Rs 6.390.899.7917.07
  (5) Sales price Rs/kg 3.003.003.003.00
  (6) Estimated average sales revenues, (2)*(5) bn Rs 3.390.242.676.30
  (7) Estimated GOTN subsidy, (4)-(6) bn Rs 3.000.667.1210.77

       
Year   2002/032002/032002/032002/03

Channel / Source of Rice  BPLAPLGOTNTotal

       

  (8) Number of cards million    10.4
  (9) Distribution
b,c '000 tons        1,458            162             -           1,620  
  (10) Unit cost of rice to GOTN
a Rs/kg          5.65           8.30             -            5.92  
  (11) Estimated cost of procurement to GOTN, (9)*(10)
 bn Rs          8.24           1.34             -            9.58  
  (12) Sales price
d  Rs/kg          4.07           4.07             -            4.07  
  (13) Estimated average sales revenues, (9)*(12) bn Rs          5.94
           0.66             -            6.60  
  (14) Estimated GOTN subsidy, (11)-(13) bn Rs          2.30   
        0.68             -            2.98  
       
  (15) Change in GOTN subsidy, (14)-(7) bn Rs         (0.70)          0.03         (7.12)        (7.79) 
(a) Central issue prices from FCI for BPL and APL; Estimated figure of GOTN procurement from GOTN, Dept. of Civil Supplies. 
(b) Assumes 90 percent of rice procured at BPL price; 10 percent at APL price (figures from GOTN, Department of Civil Supplies.
 (c) Assumes 135 thousand tons/month for 12 months (approx. monthly distribution in mid- 2003). 
(d) Assumes that all ration card holders purchase at least 10 kg
s/month with average ration purchase calculated as distribution
 divided   
by number of cards = 12.98 kgs.  Average sales price = [ (10kgs @ 3.5/Rs/kg) + (2.98 kgs) @ 6.0 Rs/kg) ] / 12.98.
   48 4.20 Increasing public-private partnerships and pr
ivate sector involvement in extension 
is an encouraging development in the state.
  Public-private partnerships are also planned as 
industrial houses cooperate with extension by 
focusing on agricultural export and value-added 
processing opportunities.  For example, the New 
Anna Marumalarchi Thittam is focusing on 
small scale agro-industries.  Some industries bei
ng considered include edible oil extraction, paddy 
hulling, cashew processing, extraction of coconut oil, ice cream making, etc.  To date, no 
sustained expansion in the marketing of horticultural crops has taken place because extension has 
not been reorganized, strengthened and given a ne
w mandate for organizing farmer organizations 
that can systematically supply these planned new 
value chains.  If the ATMA model  (see Box 
4.1) could be introduced into Tamil Nadu, a more
 coordinated and systematic extension program 
could be organized at the district and bl
ock level to develop 
production and marketing 
arrangements for high-value commodities and to 
organized value-added processing enterprises.  
4.21 The state could also draw on a variety of 
international experiences with transforming 
extension systems into more client responsive ser
vices.  For example, Chile introduced a system 
of contracting private service providers in 1978, 
involving farmer organizations that propose 
defined projects for commercialization and mode
rnization of small-farm agriculture at a 
decentralized level.  In Keny
a, the Agricultural Technology and Information Response Initiative 
implemented by the Kenyan Agricultural Research
 Institute since 2000, provides grants averaging 
$3000 to farmers organizations or community-bas
ed organizations to finance acquisition of technologies, exchange visits to other farmers, and visits by institu
te staff.  Similarly, Bangladesh 
provided funding ($1,500 per year) to 
upazilas (sub-districts) to promote collaboration between 
public and private agencies through an average of
 four to five small-scale projects in each sub-
district (World Bank, 2004b).   
4.22 One innovative public-private sector initiative involves the disseminating of 
extension information to farmers through th
e use of internet kiosks in rural areas
.  The 
system allows farmers to obtain up-to-date 
information on major crop prices, advances in 
production technologies, as well as other information on various social services including schools 
and health facilities. Through these kiosks, called Pa
rry™s Corners, farmers can also send their 
queries regarding agricultural problems faced in th
e field to extension workers in the Department of Agriculture and researchers at the Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University.  The kiosk attendant 
owns a digital camera that can be used to photogr
aph crop damage, pests inf
estations etc.  These photographs can then be transmitted to researcher
s and extension workers for diagnosis. This 
strategy has been successful in prompting ear
ly responses to several outbreaks of plant and 
animal diseases.  
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  49 Text Box  4.1:  The ATMA Approach to Extension 
 Several states in India have m
oved away from the T&V approach to
 a more decentralized extension 
approach that integrates extension programs across the major line departments, and introduces 
participatory, bottom-up planning procedures, resulting the creation of a more responsive, transparent 
and accountable extension system. In the mid-1990s the Government of India and the World Bank 

undertook a systematic assessment of the post-T&V Extension situation and then carried out a pilot 
project under the Innovations in Technology Dissemination (ITD) component of the National 
Agricultural Technology Project (NATP).  This proj
ect, which was launched in 1998, was designed to 
field-test a new extension model that focused 
on improving farm income through agricultural 
diversification.  The new model involved decentrali
zed, restructured and reoriented extension activities 
at the district and block levels through a new institution called the Agricultural Technology 
Management Agency, or ATMA.  (In Hindi, ATMA 
means ﬁsoul;ﬂ therefore, this new institution was 
to become the 
soul of agricultural development
 within each district.)  This ATMA approach has now 
been pilot tested in 28 project districts across 7 st
ates.  As a result of the successes achieved, in 2002 
the Government of India (GOI) adopted a new 
Policy Framework for Agricultural Extension
 that 
endorsed this new integrated approach. 

 
The new extension system promoted through the 
ATMA model places more 
emphasis on agricultural 
diversification and improving rural incomes.  The GOI™s new extension policy reflects the current 

agricultural development situation in India.  First, there is recognition that the country has achieved 

food security; therefore,
 extension priorities need to shift towards agricultural diversification and 
improving rural household income.  Second, this new 
policy recognizes that a) the private sector is 
assuming more responsibility for extension activities related to the major food and commercial crops; 
b) most productivity gains associated with high yielding varieties have already been exploited, 
therefore, further investments in DOA extension w
ill result in minimal returns on investment; and c) 
hunger in India today is essentially a poverty problem, therefore, further investments in field crop 
extension will do little to alleviate rural poverty and hunger. 
 
Given the successes achieved through the ATMA model, the GOI now recognizes that there is 
considerable scope to increase rural household income and reduce rural poverty by focusing on high 
value crop and livestock enterprises, including value-added processing.  This new policy agenda 

reflects a shift in focus from extension promoting field crop technology (i.e. supply driven), to a new 
focus on market driven opportunities for high value commodities.  In addition, many project districts 
have been successful in building ﬁsocial capitalﬂ by organizing and mobilizing rural women and 

unemployed young farmers to undertake these high value commodities and enterprises.  
 The combination of new goals, a decentralized approa
ch and a new integrated structure has created new 
enthusiasm for a public extension system that is more responsive to rural people and capable of 
increasing rural household income.  In addition, th
e ATMA framework provides mechanisms for cost 
recovery and strengthening research-extension linkages.  The combination of Block Technology Teams 
(BTTs), Farmer Interest Groups (FIGs) and Farmer
 Associations (FAs) is also a more effective 
approach in disseminating information on specific high value commodities and/or enterprises. , making 

it possible to to reduce the long-term cost of extension by phasing out village extension workers 
through attrition. 
  505. Agricultural Markets and Market Policies  5.1 Development of agricultural markets will be 
essential for agricultural diversification 
and accelerated farmer income growth
.  Significant reforms in markets have taken place in 
recent years, giving a larger role to the priv
ate sector and removing movement restrictions. 
Promising institutional developments in marketing in
clude an expansion of contract farming, long 
established for sugar cane, which has begun on 
a small scale through private sector initiatives in 
cotton, gherkins (cucumbers), poultry and rice.   
5.2 As in most states of India, the public sector has historically played a major role in 
Tamil Nadu™s agricultural markets.  The initiatives of the government focused on framing rules 
and regulations to ensure fair trade practices, 
establishing institutional markets, building storage 
and warehousing facilities, creating institutions fo
r standardization and grading, and building 
awareness among farmers regarding the public ma
rketing infrastructure that was provided. 
5.3 Government intervention in markets 
involved three major channels: direct 
procurement and sales, regulated markets, and cooperatives.
  In Tamil Nadu, the government 
intervened directly in paddy, rice, sugar and cotton markets through 
direct procurement and 
sales.  It also placed restrictions on private trade, and set up 
regulated markets
 to facilitate 
transactions between farmers and licensed traders
, in order to provide fair prices for farmers 
and ensure fair trading practices.  Restricti
ons on movements of commodities were designed to 
prevent sales to importing regions from causi
ng shortages in exporting regions.  Licensing 
requirements helped the government monitor tr
aders and limit their scales of operation.  
Cooperatives were actively encouraged and had si
gnificant roles in milk markets.  
Private trade in unregulated markets
 operated only on a small scale, mainly at the village level, yet accounted 
for the large majority of sales of most crops other than paddy and sugar cane . 
5.4 Significant reforms have taken place in the 1990s in Tamil Nadu, increasing the role 
of the private sector in general.  
The scale of direct procurement of paddy has been reduced 
(and the GOTN no longer procures paddy on its
 own account), though regulated markets and 
cooperative sectors continue.  More recently, 
the GOTN has actively encouraged private 
marketing through lifting of stock and movement 
restrictions for rice, waiving of the cess on 
cotton sales, promotion of contract farming,
 and planned investments in rural market 
infrastructure.  Market Structure: Regulated and Private Markets 
 5.5 Tamil Nadu has 270 regulated markets
 and 15 sub-markets, located at major assembling 
centers, managed by 16 market committees at district level.
  At the top of the organizational 
structure is the state-level 
Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Marketing Board, 
an autonomous 
and advisory body that helps the market comm
ittees to organize and implement development 
activities, and plans for improvements in marketing of
 agricultural produce in the state. It is also 
responsible for development of infrastructural facilities at market committee level, enabling 
publicity and propaganda activities of the regulated
 markets,  and training the market committee 
personnel.  5.6 Market committees
 are headed by a chairman who is
 selected from among the members. 
The market committees collect ce
ss for the marketed agricultu
ral produce in their respective defined operational areas. Market cess for the sale 
of notified commodities, whether sold within 
the premises of regulated markets or outside, we
re increased from 0.45 per cent to one per cent 
during the last decade. Selling notified commodities 
within the premises of regulated market is 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  51purely voluntary. Tax assessments on sales outside
 of regulated markets are based on sales 
declarations of traders to tax collectors. Traders who pay the cess on their sales outside of 
regulated markets receive no direct benefit from the 
regulated markets.  For these traders, the cess 
functions as a general sales tax. 5.7 The regulated markets have been provided with infrastructural facilities like godowns, 
commercial grading centres and drying yards. We
lfare schemes to encourage farmers to bring 
their produce to regulated markets such as pl
edge loans and Tamil Nadu Farmers Development 
Welfare Scheme are also operated.  
5.8 Overall, regulated markets account for only about 10 percent of the total value of 
sales of all foodgrains. For the  major crops  with significan
t sales in regulated markets (paddy, 
maize, ragi, green and black gram, groundnuts,
 sesame, turmeric and cotton) these markets 
account for only 15 percent of the value of production.)
 (Table  5.1).
  There are large variations 
across region and by commodity, however, with re
gulated markets in Cuddalore, Villupuram and 
Thiruvannamalai districts (northeast zone) having high volumes of transactions and markets in 
Madurai, Ramanathapuram and Tirunelveli districts (southern zone) with relatively few transactions.  Surveys by the Department of 
Agricultural Economics, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University indicate that farmers are aware of th
e regulated market, but that small and marginal 
farmers with very small marketable surplus tend 
to sell their produce to village traders.   
5.9 Regulated markets account for a higher percentage of sales of turmeric (42 percent), 
sesame (55 percent).
  Market committees for turmeric in Erode and Trichy districts (western 
zone and Cauvery delta) have been particularly
 successful in spurring production, sales and 
exports.   5.9 Marketing through Primary Co-operative 
Marketing Societies (PCMS) account for 
an even smaller share of trade (Table 5.2).  
Through the PCMS at the local (taluk) level, the 
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Marketing Federation 
(TANFED) procures cotton, paddy, chilly, 
sunflower seeds, coriander, blackgram and other cr
ops.  It thus acts as an agent of the National 
Agricultural Marketing Federation of India (
NAFED) to provide price support and promote 
exports.  The PCMS also assists member farmers in processing, storing and marketing their 
agricultural produce, in some instances providing
 credit, arranging auction sales, or directly 
purchasing agricultural produce.  The total value of the produce marketed through the 
cooperatives has increased over time (Table  5.3) mainly due to marketing of cotton and 
sugarcane.   5.10 In 1999, the Tamil Nadu Government established Farmers Markets (
Uzhavar 
Sandhai) for fruits and vegetables to reduce marketing costs between growers and 
consumers.
  At present nearly 100 Farmers Markets are 
functioning in the state, in parallel with other marketing channels.   
5.10 Small village markets (shandies) provide
 markets for sales and purchases of 
agricultural commodities, as well as agricultural inputs consumer goods.  On an average, 
each shandy caters to a geographical area of a
bout 15 square kilometers. and a population of 
about 30,000 spread over about 25 villages.  The total volume of marketable surplus of 
agricultural commodities passing through the periodi
c markets in India is somewhere between six 
and twenty per cent of the surplus. 

 Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  52 Table  5.1:  Marketed Surplus and Market Ch
annels of Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2001-02 
 Production 
Marketed 
Surplus Production Sales     Regulated Markets
  th tons percent mn Rs mn Rsth tons percent 
       
Paddy 
6,584
73%49,91836,685786 16%
Maize 118
100%55155158 49%
Cholam (sorghum) 
275
87%1,3171,142
n.a. n.a.Cumbu (pearl millet) 
153
90%681614
n.a. n.a.Ragi (finger millet) 
235
83%1,0548787 3%
Red gram 
41100%529529
n.a. n.a.Green gram 
53100%9839839 16%
Black gram 
104
94%1,8201,71615 15%
Sugarcane 
37,249
89%28,45325,323
 Groundnut 
1,250
98%15,87315,54359 5%
Sesame 
4698%75373825 55%
Chilly 
4289%1,024914
n.a. n.a.Coriander 
7100%158158
n.a. n.a.Turmeric 
118
100%1,8141,81350 42%
Cotton 
230
100%3,5603,56068 30%
Tomato 
258
100%720720
n.a. n.a.Onion 
279
82%1,009832
n.a. n.a.     
 Total 
  84%110,21892,6991,076 10%
Note: Value of sugar cane is calculated using the price of jaggery, assuming an 8 percent extraction rate. 
Source: Share of marketed surplus from the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops Scheme, Department of 

Agricultural Economics, TNAU. Farmgate prices from Season and Crop Report, 2000-01, Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics.
  Rice Markets 
 5.11 For three decades, from the early 1960s to
 the early 1990s, the state government 
controlled the majority of paddy trade, procur
ing paddy for the public distribution system.  
In the early 1960s, the state procured five bags 
of paddy (65 kgs each) per hectare, for all the 
farms having about one hectare under paddy. Later, 
this was restricted to the Cauvery Delta zone 
(zone IV) under the monopoly procurement scheme, 
by which the entire marketable surplus of 
paddy in the region was to be sold only to the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation.  
5.12 In 1993-94, a system of parallel procurement was introduced for paddy which 
continues to date.  
 Under the system of parallel procurem
ent, farmers have the option to sell 
their marketable surplus of paddy either to 
the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation at 
procurement prices or to private traders at market prices. Since October 2002, the state 
government has not procured rice on its own beha
lf, but instead the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies 
Corporation procures rice on behalf of the F
ood Corporation of India at the Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) fixed by the GoI.  Unlike in most other states of India, neither the Food Corporation 

of India nor the state government procures rice through a levy on rice mills.   
 53 Table  5.2: Estimated Net Trade in Rice for Tamil Nadu (thousand tons), 1997/98 - 2002/03 
             Retail       
    Availability Availability Price of    
  Public PDS (Production (Production 
Common          Net Imports 
  Production  Procurement Distribution + net 
PDS) + net PDS) Rice GSDP/cap Est. 1 Est. 2 
  ('000 tons) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) kgs/
person Rs('01)/kg 000 Rs(01) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) 
          
          

 97/98  6,8941,2312,2387,901131.59.6720.1556-698
 98/99  8,1417332,1219,52915710.8721.16-1,493-2,322
 99/00  7,5328912,2118,852144.511.2622.18-742-1,360

 00/01  7,2181,6912,1057,632123.511.0822.95546248
 01/02  6,8738322,2018,242132.410.7623.48       
      -                 -    
 02/03  4,860               -    2,2777,137113.811.0722.841,164828
          
Ave 97/98          
 - 01/02 7,3321,0762,1758,431137.810.7321.99-327-826

          
Difference -2,472-1,076102-1,294-240.340.861,4911,654
  -34%-100%5%-15%-17%3.10%4%-456%-200%
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  54 Figure  5.1:  Rice Prices 
in Chennai 1994:  2003 
02
468101214
1619941995
1996
1997
199819992000
2001
2002
2003Rs/kg
Wholesale Fine Rice
Wholesale Common Rice
PDS Issue Common Rice
PDS Issue Super Fine
Imp Parity 15% broken Thai
    
  55Table  5.3:  Estimates of Marketing Channels
 for Major Crops (Percentage of Farm Sales) 
  Direct   Co-operative       
 ProcurementRegulated Marketing  Private  
  Centers Markets Societies Mills/Traders Total 
       
Paddy 6 20 2  72 100 
Coarse cereals  10   90 100 
Maize  5   95 100 
Pulses  10   90 100 

Oilseeds  30  15 55 100 

Sugarcane    80 20 100 

Chillie  16   84 100 

Turmeric  70 5  25 100 
Onion     100 100 
Vegetables  10 *  90 100 

Banana     100 100 

Cotton  15 15  70 100 
Milk   45  55 100 
Note:  Private traders include sales directly to cons
umers, sales of sugar cane to jaggery processors 
and sales of milk to private dairies. Oilsee
ds include groundnut and gingelly (sesame). 
Source: TNAU (2003).  Promoting Agricultural Development in Tamil Nadu 
 5.13 Substantial private sector rice trade takes place between Tamil Nadu and the 
neighboring states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
 with exports consistently 
mainly of coarse rice and imports consisting largely 
of finer rice varieties.  Movement restrictions 
preventing the export of Tamil Nadu to other stat
es, and storage restrictions for paddy/rice by 
millers and traders were also lifted during 1993-94.
38 No data on inter-state trade exists, but rough estimates of net trade can be made on the 
basis of changes in within state supply from 
production and net public distribution (incl
uding both ration sales and various employment 
programs), together with estimates of demand derived from an assumed base year demand, 

changes in real prices and incomes, and demand parameters (
Table  5.1). 
5.14 Demand estimates for various years in 
Table  5.1 use 2001/02 as a 
base, and assume that no net private trade took place in that year.  Per 
capita availability from production (less ten percent 
for seed, feed and losses) and net public distri
bution (total distribution less procurement of 
paddy/rice in Tamil Nadu) was 134.8 kgs/person in 2001/02, slightly below the average of 139.2 
kgs/person for 1997/98 to 2001/02.  Estimates of
 consumption in other years assume either 
constant per capita demand (estimate 1) or an 
own-price elasticity of demand for rice of Œ0.5 and 
an income elasticity of demand for rice of 1.0 (estimate 2).
39                                                      
 38 Note that prior to October 2002, monopoly procurement was reinstated in several years (e.g. in 1996-97 
when 922 thousand tons were procured, as well as in 1999-00 and 2000-01), in order to assure the GoTN of 
rice supplies. 39 Estimates of the income elasticity of demand for rice range from– AIDS model estimates by Kailasam 
(1991) for households in western Tamil Nadu ranged from 0.956 to 1.241 for rural household groups and 
0.695 to 1.121 for urban household groups.  Own-price elasticities ranged from Œ0.262 to -0.530 (rural) and 
-0.278 to -0.593 (urban).  Hazell and Ramasamy (1991) 
estimates of income elasticities with a pooled data 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  56 5.15 Estimates of demand and net trade indicate that, in years of normal rainfall and 
water availability, Tamil Nadu is nearly self-sufficient in rice.
  From 1997/98 to 2001/02, 
production of paddy within the state accounted 
for an estimated 89 to 95 percent of total 
consumption for the period as a whole.  During th
ese years, net public distribution averaged 1.19 
million tons, (about 15 percent of consumption), a
nd estimated average private trade net exports 
were about 300 Œ 800 thousand tons, (equal to 3 
to 10 percent of estimated consumption).   
5.16 In 2002-03 a drought year, private net rice inflows contributed an estimated 1.0-1.3 
million tons to total availability, eq
ual to 12-16 percent of consumption. 
Because of the severe drought in 2002-03, production 
of paddy fell by 2.47 million tons (a decline of 34 percent) 
compared to the average of the previous five 
years.  Net public distribution of rice was 2.15 
million tons, equal to the level of total distri
bution, since no procurement took place. Assuming 
constant per capita demand, net private trade fl
ows are estimated at 1.32 million tons, 16 percent 
of consumption.  Alternatively, adjusting for th
e higher price rise and an estimated 2.7 percent 
decline in per capita incomes relative to 2001/02, pe
r capita rice consumption fell by 2.7 percent 
and private imports were 
only about 1.0 million tons. 
5.17 Private trade flows helped stabilize market supplies and prices (
Figure  5.1).  
The influx of 1.0-1.3 million tons of rice imports from other states (and abroad) through the private 
market trade helped stabilize prices without a majo
r increase in public distribution in the state.  
Rice prices in Tamil Nadu closely traced those in A
ndhra Pradesh (a major source of private rice 
inflows to the state), reflecting the integration of 
these markets. As a result, the retail market price 
of rice in 2002/03 in Tamil Nadu was only 2.8 pe
rcent higher in real terms (nominal prices 
deflated using the GSDP deflator) than in 200
1/02 helping to maintain access to food for poor 
consumers.  5.18 The experience of 2002/03 suggests that private rice flows can play a major role in 
stabilizing rice prices and supplies in drought ye
ars, even apart from major increases in net 
public distribution.  Given these private rice flows, made po
ssible in part by the overall rice 
supply and demand balance in India as a whole, self-sufficiency in rice is not a prerequisite for 
food security in the state.  Nonetheless, availa
bility of low-cost rice through the PDS, coupled 
with employment schemes remains important for th
e welfare of poor households, particularly in 
drought years. 
Markets for Sugar Cane and Milk 
 5.19 Marketing of sugar cane to sugar mills 
involves contract farming arrangements between farmers and the state™s  sugar mills (2 public sector mills operated by the Tamil Nadu Sugar Corporation Limited, 16 cooperative sector mi
lls, and 19 private sector mills).  The total crushing capacity of these 38 mills is 104,550 to
ns crushing per day (TCD) and about 19.0 
million tons per year. During the crushing season 
2001-2002, the mills operated at full capacity, 
crushing 19.14 million tons of cane, and producing 
18.39 million tons of sugar, with an average 
recovery rate of 9.61 percent. 
5.20 The contract farming system for sugar cane 
provides a floor price for sugar farmers (who 
always get at least the SMP price) and divides the benefits of high market prices between farmers 
and mills.  These explicit sales contracts also help 
to insure mills of regular supply of sugar cane. 
Under the contracting system for sugar cane, farmers receive initial payments equal to the 
                                                                                                                               
                               set from 1972/73 and the early 1980s ranged from 0.32 to 0.39, with own price elasticites ranging from Œ
0.17 to -0.28. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  57statutory statutory minimum price (SMP) set by the GOI multiplied by the total quantity of sales 
to the mill.  (Note that the SMP is made known 
to the farmers well in advance of the sowing 
season for sugar cane.)  When average market 
sales prices of processed sugar rise above the 
government-determined approximate average cost of
 processed sugar (the ﬁ5A priceﬂ, which is 
determined from industry average rendements
40, average processing costs, and estimated capital 
depreciation costs), a second payment is made to
 farmers, in which the sales revenues arising 
from the positive margin between th
e actual sales price and the 5A price is split evenly between 
mill and farmer.  (In Tamil Nadu, an even higher pr
ice, the State Advised Price (SAP) is paid by 
state mills, but not by private mills.)   
5.21 In Tamil Nadu, as in most of India, milk is
 sold through Milk Producers Co-operatives at 
the village level.  Farmers supply milk to the 
society at a pre-determined price based on fat 
content and solid non fat.  The society also pr
ovides technical guidance and financial assistance. 
Commodity Marketing Boards 

5.22 Commodity boards for plantation crops, su
ch as the Tea Board and Coffee Board, were established by the 
Ministry of Commerce, Government of
 India. Each Board offers various schemes to i) develop new technologies and prom
ote adoption of the same, so as to increase 
productivity, ii) provide support for various marketing 
activities, iii) to initiate efforts to promote 
exports and iv) to maintain a data 
bank and undertake extension activities. 
5.23 The Tea Board promotes tea research and exports of tea worldwide, collects and 
disseminates statistical data as well as encourag
es labor welfare programs among a host of other 
activities all aimed at ensuring the health and vibr
ancy of the world™s largest producer of tea. 
Until 1995, the Coffee Board had a monopolistic cont
rol over the marketing of coffee in India. 
However, the winds of liberalization swept the 
Indian coffee industry and since 1995, marketing 
of coffee is strictly a private sector activity. 
Contract Farming 5.24 The pace of reforms has accelerated in recen
t years and the state is now supporting 
new initiatives in contract farming and agricultural exports (Text Box  5.1).  Contract farming 
involving business agreements for purchase of output and often provision of inputs and extension advice is increasing, particularly for sugar cane,
 cotton, and horticultural crops. For medicinal 
plants, contract farming has just begun wherein the wholesaler comes in agreement with the 
farmer producers. A contract made is for an ag
reed price under the technical guidance of the 
buyer and assistance is ensured to the farm
ers in getting financial support from nationalized 
banks.  5.25 Cotton contract farming has just started 
in about 1200 hectares in 2002-03 season 
and it is expanding. 
The only difference is that the farmers 
have the option to sell cotton to the 
contractor or to any other buyer under the market
 prices prevailing during harvest period. For the 
services provided by the contractor, a nominal charge
 will be levied on the farmer on an unit area basis. 5.26 Gherkin cultivation and processing started in India in the early' 90s and at present 
is spread over 7,900 hectares in the three southe
rn states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh.
 Although gherkins can grow virtually in any part of the country, the ideal 
conditions required for growth 
prevail in these three states where the growing season extends 
through out the year. There are about twelve companies operating in the state and each company 
                                                     
 40 The yield of sugar extracted from cane. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  58has agricultural extension team of 5-25 who 
identify farmers and then enter into a buyback 
contract with them.  
5.27 Contract farming for poultry is also practiced
 in Tamil Nadu.  For broilers, firms supply 
chicks, feed, medicines and technical guidance to th
e farmers.  The firms then buy the birds when 
they are eight weeks old at a predetermined price.   
Rural Infrastructure 
 5.28 Tamil Nadu™s rural infrastructure is relative good compared to most other states in 
India, but further improvements will have high pay-offs.  
Almost 100 percent of  Hamlets  
(47, 838 out of a total of 47,853 Hamlets) in 
the state are electrified. Access to rural water supply 
is also fairly high.  Ninetly-four percent of rura
l habitations are fully covered in terms of access to 
rural water supply while the remaini
ng 6 percent are partially covered.
41Although Tamil Nadu 
has an extensive road network, further attention 
to maintenance and upgrading of rural roads in 
some regions may be warranted.   
                                                     
 41 According to GoTN definitions, a habitation is fully covered by rural water supply if the population has 
access to 40 lpcd. Partially covered habitations are ha
bitations with a water suppl
y of less than 40 lpcd. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  59Text Box  5.1:  Contract farming in Tamil Nadu: New Initiatives for Rice  
Contract farming involves a business agreement between a farmer and a firm in which the firm 
may provide inputs, extension services, processing and 
a ready market in return 
for a guaranteed source of 
supply of the output product.  Such arrangements 
between sugar mills and cane farmers has long been 
practiced in Tamil Nadu and other parts of India.  For other products, however, restrictions on private 
sector trade motivated by a general mi
strust of traders, along with the 
structural characteristics of output 
markets (including the inability to differentiate products by quality or brand) have greatly limited the 
scope of contract farming.    
 Contract farming offers several potential benefits: it 
can reduce market risk for both farmers and firms, 
facilitate technology adoption as firms with access to capital an
d knowledge of new production 
technologies have an incentive to assist farmers in improving quality and productivity, and enhance 
quality of the final product, increasing value addition in
 processing.  Potential adverse implications of 
contract farming exist as well, though, since there is a possibility that firms may acquire significant 

market power as they expand, to
 the detriment of farmers.   
 Contractual arrangements between sugar cane farmers and sugar mills have a long history in India.  

Economies of scale in sugar processing technology, ra
pid perishibility of the product (the yield of sugar 
extracted from the cane (ﬁrendementﬂ) declines sign
ificantly within days of harvesting the cane), and 
difficulties of transporting bulky sugar cane, make fi
xed contracts between local sugar mills and farmers 
desirable from an efficiency standpoint.  To pr
otect the interests of both farmers and mills, the 
Government of India 
placed marketing regulations on sugar cane
 and created a system of administered 
prices.     Beginning in a limited way in 2002/03, EID Parry to
ok tentative steps towards establishing contract 
farming in rice.  EID Parry sold approximately 60 tons of improved seeds for super fine quality ponno 

rice (enough for about 800 hectares of rice at a seed
 rate of 75 kgs/hectare)
 and provided extension 
services to sugar cane farmers who sold sugar cane to
 the firm™s sugar mill in 
Cuddalore, and were also 
wiling to grow rice.  With the improved rice technology, paddy yields were approximately 25 percent 

higher than normal yields of 3.75
 tons/hectare.  Moreover, because of
 drought, market prices were about 
20 percent higher than the previous year.   
 EID Parry later purchased the output.  In the absence of
 an explicit sales contract, though, the firm risked 
not being able to purchase supply for its rice mills. 
In 2003/04 the firm plans to make commitments to 
farmers to procure rice at market prices from farmer
s who purchase seed.  If the trial is successful, the 
firm may providing inputs on credit and establish explicit sales contracts that are binding for farmers in 
future years.  (EID Parry™s existing contracts with
 the same farmers for sugar cane may provide an 
implicit additional enforcement mechanism to deter farmer default.) 
 The entrance of large private firms 
into rice markets has only been possible with the removal of stocking 
limits (in May 2003), and other restrictions on move
ments of paddy and rice.  Availability of new seed 
and processing technology, combined with firms™ market knowledge could make contract farming 

arrangements profitable for bot
h farmers and firms.  If quality is impr
oved, and is noticeable so that rice 
achieves higher price, firms will be able to afford to 
pay higher prices, particularly if brand names can be 
established. Maintaining competition between trader
s will remain important, however, since if firms 
significantly increase their market sh
ares, monopoly power of the firms could reduce benefits for farmers.  
Institutional arrangements (such as promotion of farmer organizations) may also be needed to make sure 
small farmers benefit, as well.  
   606. Agricultural Growth and Rural Poverty  6.1 Rural poverty is concentrated amongst rural la
ndless laborers and small farmers (especially 
those without significant amounts of irrigated land)
.  The PDS is an important safety net for the 
rural poor.  Ration sales from public stocks, co
mbined with targeted public nutrition and 
employment programs, and price-stabilizing market flows of rice from neighboring states enabled 

the state to avoid serious declines in welfare of the poor during 2002-03, a year of severe drought.  

The extent to which future agricultural growth
 reduces rural poverty will depend on the degree to 
which small farmers shift to cultivation of highe
r value crops and have access to remunerative 
markets, and labor demand increases, par
ticularly in the dry seasons.      
Rural Poverty42 6.2 The latest available data indicate that th
ere were between 7 and 11 million rural poor among Tamil Nadu™s population of  62 million in 1999/00 (
Table  6.1:). 
Findings on the 
incidence of poverty in rural versus urban 
areas in Tamil Nadu vary depending on the 
methodology used to estimate poverty lines.
43 According to the official Planning Commission 
estimates, the incidence of poverty in rural areas w
as lower than that of urban areas. The adjusted 
estimates of Deaton and Drèze (2002) arrive at 
the opposite conclusion reporting an incidence of 
poverty in urban areas less than half of that in
 rural areas.  Estimates by Kijima and Lanjouw 
(2003) also find that urban poverty is below rural 
poverty.  According to Kijima and Lanjouw, the 
estimated poverty rate in 1999/00 was 31.8 percent in
 rural areas compared to a poverty rate of  
22 percent in urban areas. The same authors also
 find that Tamil Nadu was the most poor of the 
Southern states, and had a higher incidence of 
poverty than India as a whole. These findings 
differ from those of Deaton and Drèze (2002) that reveal a slightly lower incidence of poverty in 
Tamil Nadu as compared to India as a whole.  
Table  6.1:  Poverty Estimates for Tamil Nadu  (1999/2000) 
 Head Count (%)
  No. of Poor (million)
     Urban Rural Overall Urban Rural Overall 
Indian Official Estimates 
22.1 20.6 21.1 5.6 7.4 13 
Deaton and Drèze 
(2002) 
11.3 24.3 20.0 
2.9 8.7 11.6 
Kijima and 

Lanjouw (2003) 
22.0 31.8 28.9 5.6 11.4 17 
Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003 
 6.3 Tamil Nadu™s rural poverty rates have declined over time.  
All three sets of poverty 
estimates report declining rural poverty rates althoug
h they differ in their estimates of the rate of 
decline. Kijima and Lanjouw™s (2003) estimates suggest a decline in rural poverty in Tamil Nadu 
between 1993/94 and 1999/00 of about 6.7 per
centage points compared to a decline of 14.2 
                                                     
 42 This section draws heavily on the Tamil Nadu Poverty Note:  Poverty in the 1990s, A Preliminary 
Profile and Emerging Issues by Peter Lanjouw, Rajshri Jayaraman and Yoko Kijima.  The Tamil Nadu 
poverty note provides an analysis of poverty issues in the state drawing on existing household survey data 
and village studies.  This section summarizes some of the main findings of the poverty note pertaining to 
the incidence and profile of rural poverty in the state. 
43 Refer to Lanjouw et al., 2003 for a detailed summary of the various methods and their findings. 
   61percentage points reported by Deaton and Drèze (2002).  The official Planning Commission 
estimates suggest a decline in the rura
l poverty rate of 12.3 percent.  
6.4 The limited data on rural poverty over ti
me suggests a correlation with labor and 
land productivity growth, though no definitive conclusions are possible
.  From 1987/88 to 
1999/00, rural poverty decreased from 45.6 to 20.6 
percent.  During this same period, land 
productivity grew by 3.9 percent per year and 
labor productivity increased by 3.3 percent per 
year.  Given the importance of returns to land fo
r small farm incomes a
nd labor earnings for all 
rural poor households, these gains in land and labor productivity certainly contributed to raising 
rural incomes.  However, since non-agricultura
l incomes also account for a large share of 
incomes of the poor, more data and analysis at th
e household level (ideally 
with panel data sets) would be required to quantify the effect of
 agricultural productivity gains on rural poverty. 
Figure  6.1:  Productivity and Rural Poverty 
-5,00010,00015,00020,000
25,000
30,00087/8893/9499/00
Constant 1993/94 Rupees010
20
30405060
70
80
90
100Percentage of Rural Poorlabor productivity
land productivity
rural poverty
   6.5 There are marked regional variations in the 
rural poverty with a higher incidence of 
rural poverty in the Coastal North and South
. The incidence of  rural poverty  (according to 
the Lanjouw and Kijima estimates) appears to
 be higher in the Coastal North and South.
44 Between 1993/4 and 1999/0, poverty fell in all N
SSO regions with the exception of the Coastal 
North, where the poverty incidence, based on th
e Kijima-Lanjouw adjustment methodology, is 
estimated to have risen from 21 percent to 29 percent. 
6.6 The rural poor in Tamil Nadu typically own 
less land than the non-poor and are highly represented among the marginal landowners.
   Rural poverty is concentrated among those with 
marginal landholdings, and is lowest among tho
se with relative large landholdings. The incidence 
of poverty appears to be lower among the landl
ess (non-agricultural households) as compared to 
marginal landholder (those with less than 0.4 
hectares of land). Access to land alone does not 
                                                     
 44 Coastal North districts include Chennai, Thiruvalluvar, Kancheepuram, Thiruvannamalai, Vellore, 
Villupuram, Cuddalore.  South districts include Tiru
chirapalli, Parambalur, Ariy
alur, Karur, Nagapattinam, 
Thiruvarur, Thanjavur, Pudukkottai. Coastal districts include  Dindigul, Madurai, Theni, Virudhunagar, 
Sivaganga, Ramanathapuram, Thoothukkudi, Tirunelveli, Kanniyakumari.  Inland districts include 

Coimbatore, Nilgiris, Erode, Namakkal, Salem, Dharmapuri. These regional classifications are based on the 
National Sample Survey Organization™s regional zonal classifications. 
Source:  Authors™ Calculations.   
Note:  Poverty rates are based on the unadjus
ted official Planning Commission poverty lines 
which overestimate the decline in poverty rates due
 to non-comparability of
 the expenditure data 
between the 55th round and previous rounds of the NSS. 
   62allow rural households to escape poverty. Estimates from 1999/00 reveal that 20 percent of  
households owning more than 4 hectares of land
 were poor  (fell in the bottom two quintiles of 
per capita consumption) compared to an pove
rty incidence of 45 percent among marginal 
landholders.  6.7 In Tamil Nadu the risk of poverty is co
nsiderably more pronounced amongst those 
whose land is not irrigated. According to estimates from 1999/00, approximately 42.1 percent 
of households without irrigation were poor (per 
capita consumption rank of less than 40 percent) 
as compared to 33.8 percent of household with
 irrigation. Among marginal landholders 45.4 
percent of households without access to irrigation were poor compared to a poverty incidence of 
39.3 percent among marginal landholders
 with access to irrigation.   
6.8 The rural poor are more likely to be reliant on agriculture as a source of income.  
Farming contributes to over 50 percent of rura
l income. The poorest households (those in the lowest income quintile) receive almost 78 pe
rcent of these income from cultivation and 
agricultural wage labor.  In fact, almost 52 per
cent of the income of the poorest households can 
be attributed to agricultural wage labor alone. 
As one moves from the lowest to highest income 
quintiles,  the contribution of agricultural wage 
income to total income decreases monotonically, 
while that of cultivation and non-farm sources in
creases monotically.  Wealthier rural households 
appear to have access to more assets (physical a
nd human capital) allowing them to participate in 
more remunerative non-farm employment activities. 
6.9 About one-fifth of the population in Tamil Na
du belongs to scheduled castes or tribes 
whose average standard of living is cons
iderably below the rest of the population.
  Eighty-
eight percent of SC/ST households owned less 
than 0.4 hectares of land in 1999/00. SC/ST 
households have a lower mean per capita consum
ption as well as lower levels of education as 
compared to non-SC/ST households. Scheduled cast
e and scheduled tribe population groups are 
highly represented in agricultural wage labor ac
tivities and  are particularly under-represented 
among cultivators and in regular non-farm employment.   
Table  6.2:  Farm Income Shares in Tamil Nadu 
Quintile CultivationAgriculture 
wage Labor
Total 
Nonfarm sources Other 
sourcesReal Per Capita 
Income Lowest 26.351.619.82.31,093
Q2 27.827.543.21.62,130
Q3 32.621.644.41.43,377
Q4 35.714.945.545,431
Highest 42.85.250.41.612,292
Total 37.713.746.42.14,867
  Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003
  6.10 In both urban and rural areas, average consum
ption levels of households where the head 
had completed secondary education or higher are 
about twice as high as when the household head 
was illiterate. 
Labor Markets 6.11 Real wage rates in agriculture have risen steadily in the 1990s.
  The average annual increase in the real wage for male labor for harvesting increased from 2.8 percent per year during 
1986-92 to 7.2 percent per year during 1993-2001 (
Table  6.3).  During this latter period (1993-
2001), paddy and rice prices declined by an average 
of 2.0 percent per year in real terms due to 
increased productivity (yields) of paddy in Tamil Na
du, and in recent years, the declining cost of 
   63imported rice in neighboring states
.  Thus, the real wage in terms of paddy (rice) grew by an 
average of 9.8 percent per year from 1992/93 to 2000/01, again indicating increased purchasing 
power for rural laborers (
Figure  6.2).   
Table  6.3:  Real rural wages in Tamil Nadu, 1986-2001 
        1986-92 1993-2001 1986-2001
 1986-881999-01Percent% growth% growth % growth
  Rs(2000)Rs(2000)Changerate rate rate 
       
Rural Wage Rate I (Rs 2001/day)
a, b  36.772.798.2%2.8%7.2%5.2%
Rural Wage Rate II (Rs 2001/day)
 a,c 3971.483.0%3.2%4.9%4.8%
Paddy Price Wholesale (Rs 2001/kg) 
b 6.584.87-26.0%0.7%-2.8%-2.5%
Rural Wage Rate I/ Rice Price (kgs/day)
 d 3.7510.01167.1%2.1%10.3%7.9%
a Wage rate for male labor for harvesting activities; 
 b Using the state GSDP price index as a deflator; 
c Using the state rural CPI price index as a deflator; 
d Using conversion factor of 1 kg paddy = 0.67 kgs rice.
  Figure  6.2:  Real Paddy Prices and Rural Wage Rates in Tamil Nadu 
0501001502002501985-86
1986-87

1987-88

1988-89

1989-90
1990-91

1991-92

1992-93
1993-94
1994-95

1995-96

1996-97

1997-98

1998-99

1999-00
2000-01
Index (1985/86 = 100)
Wholesale Paddy Price
Real Wage Rate GSDPdef
Real Wage Rate (RCPI)
   6.12 A declining rural labor force reflecting sign
ificant rural-urban migration, is one 
major factor behind the rise in real agricultural wages.  
According to the Population Census, 
total population in the state increased by 6.25 million people (11.2 percent)  between 1991 and 
2001.  In this period, urban 
population grew by 8.16 million people (42.8 percent); rural 
population actually declined by 1.91 million (5.2
 percent).  The rural population was thus 12.8 
percent less than it would have been if both the 
rural and urban populations
 increased by the same 
state-wide rate (11.2 percent).   6.13 For farmers that hire labor, however,
 increased labor costs imply reduced 
profitability.  Increases in labor costs have been partia
lly offset by increases in yields, thus 
limiting the decline in farmer paddy incomes.  More
over, higher costs of labor have encouraged 
mechanization, including the use of power tillers 
for land preparation and mechanical harvesters for paddy.  Nonetheless, higher labor costs are adversely affecting incomes of commercial 
farmers in Tamil Nadu, particularly in areas 
where urban and rural non-farm employment are 
   64increasing, such as the western zone (with its textile and other industries around Coimbatore) and 
in the northeast near Chennai.   Technological Change and  Rural Poverty 
 6.14 Despite concerns that the green revolution technology for rice (improved seeds, 
increased fertilizer use and irrigation) would 
lead to increased income inequality, most 
rural household groups benefited from increa
sed rice production in the 1970s and early 1980s.  Household surveys of farmers in North Ar
cot district (now Vellore and Thiruvannamalai 
[check]) indicated that, although the first adopters of the rice technology tended to be larger 
farmers, by the early 1980s small farmers in v
illages with access to irrigation had also adopted the new technologies at the same rate as large 
farmers (Hazell and Ramasamy, 1991).  Moreover, 
land distribution had remained essentially unch
anged, and agricultural wage earnings for 
agricultural laborers increased (though real 
agricultural wage rates did not increase). 
 6.15 Moreover, increased rice production led 
to substantial rural growth linkages, adding 
an additional 0.87 rupees of value added for ev
ery 1 rupee of value added from additional rice 
production.  One-half of these multiplier effects 
were due to increased demand for agricultural 
inputs, marketing and processing services; the 
remainder derived from increased consumer 
demands as household incomes rose. 

6.16 Survey results showed that real incomes of small paddy farmers and landless laborers 
rose by 90 and 125 percent, respectively, between 1973/74 to 1983/84.  Incomes of non-
agricultural households also rose by 55 percent, 
due in part to the growth linkage effects 
emanating from agricultural growth.  Real inco
me gains of large paddy farmers were only 18 
percent, due to increased costs of fertilizer and labor.  Notably, non-paddy with no access to 

irrigated land saw real income gains of only 17 percent. 
6.17 On an all-India scale, agricultural productivity growth from 1958-1994 played a 
major role in reducing poverty in India. 45  During this period, agricultural output per acre of 
net sown area grew by 2.91 percent per year, c
ontributing to higher real wages for agricultural 
laborers (which grew by 2.84 percent per year) and a decline in the real price of food.  (The price 
of food relative to agricultural laborers™ consumer price index fell by 0.15 percent per year from 
1976-94, after having increased by 0.62 percent per year from 1958-75.)  Higher farm yields for 
small producers also contributed directly to thei
r incomes, both directly through increased value 
of output and indirectly through increased employment.     
6.18 Whether future agricultural growth reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu reduces rural 
poverty will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new technologies and have 
access to markets, the magnitude of employmen
t and real wage rate gains, and the size of 
linkage effects with rural non-agriculture
.  Further reductions in the real price of food are not 
likely given the already low food prices (particularly in Tamil Nadu where the poor have access 
to subsidized rice through the PDS).  Land distribu
tion is unlikely to become more egalitarian and 
thus contribute to a redistribution of incomes, a
nd could even become more concentrated instead.   
6.19 Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor.
  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
                                                     
 45   Datt and Ravallion, 1998, Farm productivity and rural poverty in India, Journal of Development 
Studies, No. 34, April 
   65season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops will 
be crucial, however.  Contract farming ma
y help overcome these problems, if competition 
between firms helps farmers maintain their shar
e of the value of the final product sales.   
6.20 The reduction in poverty is also likely to 
be greater if small farmers are able to 
participate in production and sales gains from off-season crops.
  New technologies like drip 
irrigation require substantial investments, and 
large farmers to adopt these technologies and shift 
to cultivation of higher value crops more quickly 
than small farmers.  Government programs to 
provide credit to small farmers were instrument
al in increasing adoption rates of rice technology in the 1970s and 1980s; the feasibility of similar 
targeted credit programs should be explored.   
      667. Conclusions and Policy Options 
 7.1 Traditional sources of agricultural growth
 in Tamil Nadu face major constraints
.  Seasonal water shortages, increasing land degradatio
n, continually shrinking farm sizes and rising 
costs of agricultural labor represent serious constrai
nts that need to be overcome if future growth 
in agriculture is to be realized. Further gains in rice production (a major engine of agricultural 
growth in the past four decades) will be hard to
 achieve, and may not be the most efficient use of 
resources in the context of national grain surpluses and the significant water requirements of rice 

cultivation.   7.2 Given the existing constraints, diversification into less water-intensive higher-value 
products, including fruits, vegetables, spices, and livestock products, is one of the most 
promising avenues for increasing agricultural growth. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions 
are well suited to diversified agriculture. Furthe
rmore, rapidly increasing incomes and changing 
food demand patterns provide strong impetus fo
r diversification. Increased agricultural 
diversification and private investments in processing for many of the higher valued agricultural 
commodities are likely to generate new rural no
n-farm employment opportunities and contribute 
to higher rural incomes.
   7.3 Overcoming the constraints faced by the 
agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu, and 
accelerating growth in agricultural production 
and the rate of rural poverty reduction, will 
require appropriate policies and inv
estments in four priority areas
: improving the efficiency 
of water use; increasing the effectiveness of public expenditures and agricultural extension; 
spurring the development of agricultural markets; 
and maximizing the real income growth of the 
rural poor. Increasing the Efficiency of Water Use 
7.4 Long-term growth in agriculture and rural incomes depends in large part on 
increasing the efficiency of use of water
.  7.5 Tamil Nadu has already taken some important
 steps in expenditure and organization 
reforms in irrigation and drainage institutions th
at are vital to improving the delivery of surface 
irrigation services and helping to ensure the longer-term performance of irrigation infrastructure.   
Further organizational reforms to streamline 
business processes to enhance efficiency and 
transparency and professionalize the work culture
 will be essential to improving service delivery 
to the client farmers, reduce costs of servi
ce provision (especially by modernizing and 
rightsizing), ensure financial sustainability of op
erations and maintenance of systems, and reduce 
the fiscal burden to state governments. 
7.6 More specifically, there are several options that Tamil Nadu could consider to manage its 
scarce water resources. These include: 
scaling up the pilot river-basin framework
 for managing water resources holistically, 
allowing interagency coordination and public-private 
partnerships; introducing specific legally enforceable 
water entitlements
 to various users in a river basin and or aquifer framework; 
changes in electricity, water and crop prices
 to change 
the financial incentives for irrigation and crop choice; 
improved management practices and 
irrigation technologies (such as drip and sprinkler irrigation) and 
new investments in canals and 
water storage (coupled with impr
oved operation and maintenance).
 7.7 Public administration in the water sector could be improved by separating the 
responsibilities for water resource management and irrigation service delivery
.  Tamil Nadu 
is the only state in India without a separate department of irrigation: administration of irrigation 
in the state is part of the Department of 
Public Works.  Two new agencies are needed: a 
   67regulatory agency to allocate the share of wate
r resources to agriculture, industry and other uses, 
and a irrigation department focusing on irrigation delivery systems.  A separate irrigation 
department would allow for the creation of a specia
lized cadre of irrigation specialists, instead of 
the current setup where staff from the Departme
nt of Public Works (which also includes administration of public buildings) are res
ponsible for delivering irrigation services.   
7.8 Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and 
WUAs are yet to be fully functional.  
There is a need to expedite the transfer of irrigation 
management to farmers in line with the FMIS 
Act so that water distribution would be more 
efficient and equitable.   7.9 The Government of Tamil Nadu recently a
nnounced increases in irrigation water 
charges and reintroduced a tariff for agricultural power consumers
. While these recent 
reforms are a step in the right direction, chargi
ng for water on a per area basis (as is the case for 
surface irrigation) or on a flat rate basis (for agricultural power consumers) is not efficient from 
an economic point of view as the marginal cost for water is almost zero and hence it does not 
affect the demand for irrigation water. 7.10  Irrigation water charges were revised  in July 2003
.  Previously, water charges were 
levied by the GoTN at a base rate (which va
ried according to crop, season, soil quality etc) 
coupled with an additional cess equivalent to six times the base rate.  This additional cess was transferred to the local panchayats.  Under the ne
w system of charges an additional water charge 
of Rs 150/ha de-linked from any additional cess ha
s been imposed.  Thus the farmer will pay the 
original charge plus the Rs 150/ha.  In add
ition, the FMIS Act empowers the water user™s 
associations (WUA) to charge users between  Rs 
250/ha to Rs 500/ha.  This additional charge can 
be retained by the WUA for operation and maintena
nce of the systems turned over to them. The 
current provisions for irrigation water charges woul
d be sufficient to allow full cost recovery of 
required O&M expenditures. The extent to which fa
rmers are actually being charged the proposed 
water rates remains unclear.  
 7.11 In 2002 an agricultural power tariff was introduced bringing an end to 12 years of 
free electricity for Tamil Nadu™s farmers.  
The revised agricultural power tariff included a flat rate for unmetered connections of Rs.250 per HP per annum and Rs.0.20/kWh for metered 
connections.  In conjunction with the reintr
oduction of the agricultural power tariff the 
government announced a pilot income support scheme 
for small and marginal farmers.  However, 
the reintroduction of the agriculture power tariff b
ecame a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu 
during the recent national election, and after a significant loss of seats in the national parliament, 
the TN government has reversed the policy.
 7.12 Other states also introduced tariffs in recent years (
Text Box  7.1).  International 
experience with income support programs also pr
ovides several important lessons for providing 
clear incentives and containing fiscal costs, including the need for targe
ting to poorer farmers 
(e.g., paying less per hectare as farm size increases, with a ceiling on the numbers of hectares 
eligible for payment), an effective delivery sy
stem for the transfer payments, and a limit on the 
number of years for which producers will be eligible for payments (
Table  7.1).
     68Text Box  7.1:  Pilot Initiatives in Reforming Power Supply to Farmers 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
  7.13 Introduction of a flat rate charges of Rs 250/year for a 5 horsepower pumpset (a 
policy that has now been reversed) would have only
 a small effect on net returns to land and 
management, reducing them by only 4.9 to 
6.5 percent for major crops grown with well 
irrigation.  Costs of crop cultivation using well irrigation would rise by only 625 Rs/ha for most 
crops (the annual charge pro-rated for one season) to 1250 Rs/ha (for sugar cane grown over 
eleven months). 
However, if electricity charges are 
raised to the estimated marginal 
economic price of electricity to agriculture of 
3.1 Rs/Kwh, electricity costs rise to about 
4,600 Rs/ha for paddy and sugar
 cane, reducing returns to land and management by 35.9 
percent for rice and 23.8 percent for sugar cane
.  Likewise, total returns to land, labor and 
capital (value added) fall sharply for paddy and s
ugar cane irrigated by wells when the cost of 
electricity for pumping is included.  If electricity is costed at its economic price, total income 
generated from cotton cultivation 
(23,949 Rs/ha) is 53 percent greater than that for rice.  
Including the subsidy on fertilizer (through the Go
I), raises the total subsidy on rice and sugar 
cane cultivated with well irrigation to 41.1 and 40.3  
percent of net financial returns at the flat rate 
cost of electricity. 
7.14 Such large policy-induced reductions in returns for farmers are likely to be 
politically infeasible (as indicated by the re
cent election results), but gradual step towards 
marginal cost pricing of electricity, (perhaps 
combined with compensa
tion to farmers in the 
form of income transfers or a more reliable electricity supply), would help rationalize water 
use in Tamil Nadu
.  If their costs and incomes varied according to the amount of electricity (and 
water) used with well irrigation, farmers would 
have an incentive to shift some land from water-
intensive crops (rice and sugar cane) towards less
 water-intensive crops (including cotton, maize 
and vegetables). Greater attenti
on to marketing infrastructure, strengthening the research and 
extension to meet the needs of diversified agriculture, the development of tools for farmers to 
better manage risks, and improving irrigation pum
pset efficiency may create an environment 
within which higher power charges woul
d be more palatable for farmers. 
Andhra Pradesh. In 2003, Andhra Pradesh initiated a ﬁtatkalﬂ
 scheme under which farmers seeking immediate 
connection are required to pay Rs. 1/kWh to expedite the connection of the utilities.  
The current rate for farmers is Rs. 0.25
/kWh 
(full cost is Rs. 4/kWh).  Under this scheme, 30,000 new conn
ections were provided during th
e year by the utilities.  The 
government and the utilities are also separating the supply of pow
er to farmers from the other 
consumers, by splitting the 11kV
 rural 
feeders.  This initiative has several me
rits, including the potential to monitor the reliability and quality of power supply to
 farmers 
and an increase in cost recovery. However, investment 
cost is high at  Rs. 10 million for each 11kV feeder.   
Karnataka.
 The State Electricity Board in Karnataka recently
 initiated a program called ﬁOwn Your Transformer 
Scheme for Irrigation Pumpsets,ﬂ involving 
the drawing of 11 kV HT line under High Volta
ge Distribution System to the premise o
f pumpset consumers and providing them with small capacity transfor
mers.  The government is asking farmers to share equally the 
cost of the investment with the utilities, which is estimated 
at about Rs. 50 billion.  The scheme has the potential to reduce 
losses 
and improve the quality of supply. But the cost of the program 
is substantial. Given the cost sharing arrangement, it is likely
 that the 
scheme would benefit mostly large farmers.   As a means to 
target the subsidies, the Karnat
aka regulatory commission for the 
purpose of determining different tariffs has classified farmers acco
rding to the number of tubewells
 they own, and to the fact 
that 
they do not perceive income from ot
her activities such as
 civil servants. User associations. The Electricity Act, 2003, provides for the Uni
on Government to issue a National Policy permitting 
stand alone systems (including those based 
on renewable sources of energy and non-conventional sources of energy) for rural are
as, 
and a National Policy for rural electrification and for bulk purchas
e of power and management of local distribution in rural ar
eas through Panchayat Institutions, users™ associ
ations, co-operatives societies, non-Governmental organizations or franchisees.  T
hese institutional models have been piloted in I
ndia.  In terms of internal efficiency, 
some cooperatives are working well while oth
ers are 
not.  In cases where it did not work well, 
one major cause was the lack of penalties in
 defaulting in payments to the public el
ectric 
utility.  The institutional model potentially promising, provided 
there is the willingness to proceed with disconnections in ca
se of 
non-payments.  
Source: Lucio Monari, 2003 as cited in World Bank, 2004
    69Table  7.1:  Selected Country Experi
ences with Agricultural Subsidy Reform 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 Farmer Income Support Programs 
  Salient Features 
 EU: Common 
Agricultural Policy  Mexico: 

PROCAMPO  
US: Agricultural 

Market Transition 

Act and Farm 
Security and Rural 
Investment Act 
Turkey Direct 

Income Support 

Program  
  New Zealand: 
Farming without 

Subsidies Objective Compensate 
producers from 
a reduction in 
support prices 
Compensate 
farmers for  

reduced income 
with elimination 
of support prices 

on selected crops due to NAFTA  
Compensate farmers 
for removal of 

deficiency payments, 
counter-cyclical 
support of farm 

income, maintain 
budget discipline 
Compensate 
farmers for  

reduced income 
due to removal of 
support prices and 

subsidies  Removal  of trade 
protection and govt 

interventions in  agriculture and agro-
industry, public sector 

& institutional reform 
& privatization except 
for public goods aspect 

of research  
Time Frame Fixed in 
nominal terms; 
no expiration 
date but subject 
to CAP reforms 
Total of 15 years; 
first 10 years fixed 
in real terms; 
declining in the 
last 5 years 

 1996 Act expired in 
2002.  2002 Act 
expires in 2007. 
No end date. 10 years 
Implemented 1993 1994 
 1996, 2002 2001 1984  
Payment basis Average 
acreage in 
support crops 
during 1989-

1991 $78 per ha in 
support crops up 
to 100 ha (2000) 
for each growing 

season. Must show 
evidence of land 
ownership and 

use, based on  
average acreage 
during 1991-93 
Fixed payment rate 
per unit output and 
variable payment rate 
that increases as 

market prices 
decrease, paid on 
each farm™s historical 
acreage and yields 
for supported 
commodities 
$110 per ha of 
land area sown as 
shown by 
cadastral records, 

originally capped at 20 ha; now 50 
ha  Total withdrawal of 
concessionary loans &  
support payments, 
subsidy schemes &  

preferential tax treatment   
Applicable commodities 
Wheat, maize, 

barley, rye, 

oats, rapeseed 
sunflower, 
soybeans, dried 

pulses, beans, tobacco, beef, 
lamb 
Wheat, maize, 
sorghum, barley, 

rice, cotton, beans, 
soybeans, 
safflower 
Wheat, maize 
sorghum, 
barley, rice, 
cotton, oats 
All crops eligible for support under 

the previous 
programs 
 None Payment limits None $ 6,700 per farm $40,000 + possible 
$20,000 on each of 
two subsidiary farms.  
$ 5,000 per farm 

 One time assistance for 

debt restructuring for 

some farmers.. 
Restriction on the 

use of land 
   
   
 Allocated to support crops; 

large producers 
must put into 
fallow a 
predetermined 
level of support-crop 

land. 
Allocated to support crops, but 

since 1996 land could be used for 
other agricultural 

uses Must remain in 
farming, no increase 

in fruit or vegetable 
area; must be in 
compliance with 

existing conservation 
plans Land has to be 
cultivated but includes fallow land. None. 
Estimated Fiscal 
Costs  $919 million 
(1998), price 
support 
reintroduced for 
some crops in 
2002. 
$15 billion per year 
under 1996 Act; 
projected; similar 
levels projected 

under 2002 Act 
$1.8 billion per year (2003) 
Fiscal savings Ag share in GDP  5% 1% 14% 5% 
Rural/Total  Popn  25% 20% 35% 3% 
Total Farmers  5 million 2.
1 million 4.1 million 109,000 
Source:  World Bank, 2004 
   707.15 Increases in electricity charges would h
ave only small effects on overall rice 
production and market prices, but major impl
ications for sugar cane production in the 
state.  Since only about 10 percent of rice area cultiv
ated is irrigated with well water (about 200 thousand hectares), changes in electricity pricing 
would have only marginal effects on total rice 
production in the state.  Moreover, since net pub
lic distribution (averaging 1.2 million tons per 
year from 1997/98-2001/02, 18 percent of net production) and private market trade from 
neighboring states (estimated at 1.0 Œ 1.3 million tons in the drought year 2002/03) are major 

sources of supply of rice, the effect of lower 
rice production from well water-irrigated areas on 
market prices of rice would likely be small.
 Impacts on sugar cane production would be much 
more significant, however, as essentially all of ar
ea is irrigated in part with well water.  
 7.16 Greater attention is also need for scaling-
up the adoption of water saving irrigation technologies and modernizing irrigation infrastructure
. While the use of sprinkler and drip 
technology has been promoted in the state, th
e high capital cost of these technologies currently 
poses a constraint to widespread adoption by marg
inal and small farmers and greater attention to 
development of more affordable technologies is 
warranted or a suitable system of targeted 
subsidies should be developed to scale-up the use of sprinkler and drip systems. 
7.17 Improving the productivity of rainfed agriculture will require new investments and 
increased emphasis on
 community participation with sound technical inputs
 to improve the 
success of watershed programs.
 A basin perspective should be adopted in implementation of 
all watershed programs
 to ensure that these initiatives do not have negative impacts on 
downstream human and ecological uses
. Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Ex
penditures and Agricultural Extension  7.18 A highly effective research and agricultural ex
tension system is needed to respond to 
the needs of diversified agriculture.  An assessment of the state™s comparative advantage in 
producing higher value crops for the domestic a
nd export markets would also help in setting 
future research and development priorities.  Re
-orienting agricultural research to make it more 
farmer-responsive would likewise improve the outpu
t of a system that has enjoyed much success 
in rice technology development in the past. Simila
rly, the current extension system in the state 
remains organized around a modified Training and Visit approach and continues to be highly 
focused on major food-grains, though the promotion of
 public-private partnerships in extension is 
a very encouraging recent  development and offe
rs potential for both cost-savings and greater 
efficiency (
Figure  7.1).  Thus, it is recommended that the GoTN develop a new agricultural 
extension strategy to meet the changing needs 
of farmers. This could include adopting an 
integrated and decentralized extension system th
at could help build farmer organizations that 
could link with private firms to increase economic growth in rural areas.   
7.19 Rationalizing public expenditures and shi
fting expenditures from subsidies to 
investments in key public goods such rural 
roads, markets and agricultural research and 
extension will facilitate productivity improve
ments and diversification of agriculture to higher value products
. Tightening competition for limited fiscal resources heightens the urgency 
of appropriate public expenditure reallocati
on. Institutional reforms within government 
departments to ensure improved quality of deliver
y of rural-related public goods and services is 
also important. 
   
    71Figure  7.1:  Alternatives for Public-Private 
Financing and Provision of Extension Services 
Financing of Extension Services 
  Public Private (Farmers) Private (Other) 
Public  Traditional extension  Fee-for-service extension 
 Contracts with public 
institutions   Service Provision 
Private 
 Subsidies to private extension service 

providers 
 Publicly-financed 
contracts for extension 
services  Commercial advisory 
services 
 Sale of newspapers, 
magazines 
 Information provided 
with sale of inputs 
 Extension provided to 
contract growers 
 Advertising in 
newspapers, radio, 
television, magazines 
   Promoting the Development of Well Functioning Agricultural Markets  7.20 Well functioning agricultural markets are al
so important for successful agricultural 
diversification. If recent policy reforms removing restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking 
and sales of paddy and 13 other crops are consisten
tly implemented at the local level, they can be 
expected to improve marketing efficiency
, reducing the margin between producer and 
consumer/export prices. Reductions in marketing 
costs are also necessary in order for production 
increases to lead to higher agricu
ltural incomes, particularly for perishable high-value products 
(e.g. fruits, vegetables, animal products). Contr
act farming and other private sector initiatives 
should be encouraged, though the impact of
 these business arrangements on farmer incomes 
should be evaluated, as well (
Text Box  7.2).  
7.21 There remain, however, important roles for the public sector in promoting agro-
food system and agro-enterprise development (
Text Box  7.3
).  In addition to policies that 
establish ﬁrules of the gameﬂ and address market fa
ilures, public investments in rural roads to 
strengthen rural connectivity can contribute to re
duced costs of marketing.  Although Tamil Nadu 
has an extensive road network, further attention 
to maintenance and upgrading of rural roads in 
some regions may be warranted.  
Given the rapidly changing nature of markets in Tamil Nadu, an 
in-depth study of market structure and 
investment needs would be useful.   
7.22 Increasing agricultural diversification will not compromise Tamil Nadu™s food 
security objectives given an effective PDS, we
ll-functioning markets and targeted nutrition programs
.  Greater food security has largely been 
achieved through increases in state production of major staples (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice through the PDS, school feeding 
programs, and targeted relief programs during droughts. During the recent drought of  2002/03 
the wholesale prices of rice only rose 2.8 percent (in real terms) above the previous year™s price, 

despite a 34 percent fall in paddy production in th
e state, helping to maintain access to food for 
poor consumers. This was largely due to privat
e sector inflows from neighboring states of Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka and the ava
ilability of rice through the PDS. 
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Source:  Source:  Alex, et al. 2001, Rura
l Extension and Advisory Services, New Di
rections, Rural Strategy Background Paper 
No. 9, Washington, DC: World Bank. 
   72 Text Box  7.2:  Contract Farming in Punjab 
 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor 
 7.23 Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor
.  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops 
remains an important unresolved issue, however.  Contract farming may help overcome these 
problems, if competition between firms helps farmers 
maintain their share of the value of the final 
product sales.  The experience of Latin America 
and the Caribbean suggests that education, 
transport infrastructure, and engines of non-farm
 growth that promote female employment are 
key aspects of a success strategy
 to promote non-farm growth 
and rural poverty reduction (Box 
7.4). 7.24 Whether agricultural diversification reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new 
technologies and have access to markets, the 
magnitude of employment and real wage rate gains, and the size of linkage effects with 
rural non-agriculture. An assessment of the implications
 for rural poverty reduction of an 
agricultural diversification strategy involving cap
ital-intensive technologies (e.g. drip irrigation) 
and higher-risk crops is needed. . This assessment
 should include a review of crop and  drought 
insurance instruments and the potential for innova
tions in these instruments to enable rural 
households, particularly the poor, to better ma
nage the new and existing risks they face. 
 Contract farming
 is production and marketing arrange
ment between farmers and processi
ng and/or marketing firms for the 
production and supply of agricultural products under forward agreemen
ts, frequently at pre-determined prices.  In Punjab, the 
state government has assigned the task of pr
omoting contract farming in the state to 
the Punjab Agro Foodgrains Corporation 
(PAFC), for which it has developed a five-year plan that aims 
to shift one million hectares out
 of rice-wheat cultivation to a 
variety of other crops.  PAFC sees its approach to be that 
of a facilitator, tying up farmers with agribusinesses which will 
supply quality seeds and technical assistance,
 and buy back the crop.  Various models
 are being tried out, but it is still too 
early to judge their effectiveness.   
 
Punjab agriculture appears to be well-suite
d for contract farming in terms of its 
physical and social environment Œ highly 
productive agriculture with assured irrigation, widespread
 mechanization, all villages connected by roads, good 
telecommunications, and average farm size more than twice the 
India average.  Moreover, PAFC™s venture into this field 
embodies a more market-oriented approach 
to agricultural development and a significan
t shift away from the state™s traditional 
focus on production as an end in itself.   

 
International experience suggests that cont
ract farming tends to succeed only in cer
tain types of crops/activities such as 
perishable products, or those where exacting market specifications 
have to be met.  Basic field crops like standard rice, wheat
, maize, oilseeds, pulses do not normally figur
e highly in contract farmi
ng programs and there is also a high risk of ‚side selli
ng™ i.e., farmer will sell output to another buyer.    
 The absence of a quick and effective contract enforcement and 
dispute resolution system in Punjab (and India) magnifies the 
risk of farmers ‚side selling™ if market prices at time of ha
rvest significantly exceed the contr
acted price, or conversely the
 risk 
of buyer default if market prices are we
ll below the contract price.  To address 
this, the state government needs to facilitate
 initiatives by agribusiness and fa
rmers organizations wishing to 
develop speedy dispute-resolution systems.  This might lead to
 a system for registration of contracts.  
The government™s role should generally be li
mited to that of a facilitator, however, s
ince 
to be successful, dispute-resolutions syst
ems are best designed by the interested 
parties.  Likewise, direct commercial 
involvement of the state should be minimal.  In some of the 
models being adopted this is not the case as PAFC is exposing 
itself to a high degree of risk by contracting to 
buy output from farmers in case the buyer backs out. 
  Source: World Bank 2003b
    73Text Box  7.3:  Role of Government in Agro
-Food System and Agro-Enterprise Development 
 Text Box  7.4:  Promoting the Rural Non-farm Economy: Lessons from Latin America and the 
Caribbean  Setting and ensuring enforcement of transparent and consistent ‚Rules of the Game™ 
 Establish and enforce rules which define and allocate prope
rty rights (i.e. property and 
bankruptcy laws; intellectual 
property rights; zoning regulations) 
 Establish and enforce rules which defi
ne permissible and non-perm
issible forms of cooperation and competition (i.e. 
licensing laws, laws of contract and liability, 
company and cooperative laws; anti-trust laws) 
 Establish and ensure compliance with bio-safety, f
ood safety, worker safety, 
and sanitation regulations 
 Negotiate favorable terms for access to international market
s and ensure fair practices on the part of international 
trading partners 
Addressing Market Failures 
 Ensure that the country is protected from the harmful 
introduction/spread of plant pests and animal diseases 
 Ensure the availability of (production, pr
ice, industry) information and statistic
s to facilitate market activity and to 
monitor market progress 
 Invest in or facilitate risk management instruments for agri
business system participants (e
.g. futures contracts, options, 
negotiable warehouse receipts, crop insurance) 
 Compensate for unbalanced power relationships within th
e agribusiness system by monitoring potential abuses of 
market power, by providing training a
nd information, and/or by supporting 
organizational development among weak 
participants  Compensate losers in structural refo
rm processes through safety nets a
nd other transitional targeted programs 
Build Physical and Knowledge Capital 
 Invest in social overhead infras
tructure, especially that rela
ted to transport, and energy 
 Invest in knowledge-building to accelerate the agribusiness 
learning process and better enable the emergent private 
sector to participate/compete (i.e. R&D; academic/technical training) 
 Facilitate development of agricultural marketing f
acilities (i.e. marketplaces; wholesale markets)  
 Source: World Bank 2003c as cited in World Bank, 2004.
 The experience of Latin America and the Ca
ribbean in promoting the growth of the rural non-farm economy suggests some basic 
policy principles:   Agricultural policies can promote non-farm activities 
such as agro-processing and the other industrial, 
commercial and service sectors that characterize modern
 agriculture.  Agricultural 
policies in areas such as 
technology generation and diffus
ion, infrastructure, education, agrarian 
reform, credit, etc., should therefore be 
designed and developed with
 these links in mind. 
 Projects and policies aimed at promoting the rural non-
farm economy should not just focus on improving the 
capacity of households to become involved in the non farm
 economy, but should also st
imulate the engines that 
pull rural households into it.  Touris
m and manufacturing are examples of su
ch engines that are not traditionally viewed as part of the rural landscape.  Engines of
 non-farm growth that offer employment to women in 
particular, should be emphasized. 
 Local governments and institutional participation will need
 to be engaged in a whole variety of capacities, 
ranging from land use planning, educ
ation provision, infrastructure inve
stment, regulations, training, and 
financing. 
 Efforts must be directed to ensu
ring public institutions with responsibilities relating to non-farm activities 
(education, public works, small-scale industry, etc.) c
oordinate efforts and long beyond traditional competencies 
to include the non-farm economy.  Education and transport 
infrastructure in particul
ar, must receive concerted 
attention.  Richer and poorer zones must be treated differently, wi
th less emphasis in richer 
zones on subsidization and more on reducing transactions costs.  In poorer zones,
 public interventions to provide the basic enabling 
environment will continue to be required.   
Source: Julio A. Berdegue, Thomas Reardon, German Esc
obar, 2000 and  World Bank 2003d as
 cited in World Bank, 2004a.
    748. References 
 Alex, G., W. Zijp, and D. Byerlee. 2002. 
Rural Extension and Advisory ServicesŠNew 
Directions, Rural Strategy Background Paper # 9,
 Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 
 
Baker, Christopher John.  1984
.  An Indian Rural Economy, 1880-1955: The Tamilnad 
Countryside.  Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
 
Berdegue,J.A., T. Reardon, G. Escobar. 2000. ﬁRur
al Non-farm Income and Employment in Latin 
America and the Caribbeanﬂ, paper presented duri
ng the conference on Development of the Rural 
Economy and Poverty Reduction in Latin Americ
a and the Caribbean, New Orleans, March 24, 2000.   

 
Brewer, J. et al. 1999.  
Irrigation Management Transfer in India :  Policies, Processes and 
Performance. New Delhi:  Oxford. 
 
Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion. 1998. ﬁF
arm productivity and rural poverty in India,ﬂ
  Journal of Development Studies
. No. 34 (April).  Deaton, A. and J. Dreze, 2002.  ﬁPoverty and Inequality in India, A Re-Examination,ﬂ 
Economic 
and Political Weekly
, September 2002, pp. 3729-48. 
 Deininger, K., D. Umali-Deininger, and A. Trita
h. 2003. ﬁTargetted Public Distribution System: 
Is it Reaching the Poor,ﬂ draft mimeo. 

 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002a. 
Statistical Handbook of Tamil Nadu, 2001
. Chennai:  
Comissioner Department of Economics and Statistics 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu.  2002b.  
Agrostat 2001
.  Chennai: Commissioner of Agriculture. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002c.  
Policy Note 2002-03 (Demand No. 12).
 Chennai:  
Department of Cooperation, F
ood and Consumer Protection.. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002d.  
Season and Crop Report, 2000-01
.Chennai:  Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics 

 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001. 
Tamil Nadu-An Economic Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  
Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001a. ﬁChapter 5:  Irrigation,ﬂ in  
Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001b. ﬁC
hapter 3:  Agriculture,ﬂ in  
Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001c. ﬁChapter 4:  Animal Husbandry, Fishery and Forestry,ﬂ in  

Tamil Nadu-An Economic Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and 
Applied Research. 
    75Gulati, Ashok and Sudha Narayanan.  2003. 
The Subsidy Syndrome in
 Indian Agriculture.  New Delhi: Oxford University Press.   
 Hazell, P.B.R. and C. Ramasamy (eds.). 1991.  
The Green Revolution Reconsidered: The Impact 
of High-Yielding Rice Varieties in South India
.  Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Kerr, John, Ganesh Pangare and Vasudha Lokur Pangare. 2002.  
Watershed Development 
Projects in India: An Evaluation
.  International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) Research 
Report 127.  Washington D.C.: IFPRI.   
 Lanjouw, Peter, Rajshri Jaya
raman and Yoko Kijima. 2003. 
Tamil Nadu Poverty Note: Poverty in 
the 1990s, A Preliminary Profile and Emerging Issues
.  World Bank (unpublished background 
paper).   
 Monari, Lucio. 2003. Power Supply to Agriculture.  Background note for India Agricultural 
Policy Review (mimeo).   

 
National Dairy Development Board. 2002. 
Annual Report 2000/01.
   National Sample Survey Organization.  National Sample Survey 54
th round (1998).  Data files.   
 Palanismai, K. 2002.  
Rationalization of Water Charges in Tamil Nadu
. Final Report to the Water 
Services Charges Committee. Mimeo. 

 Palanismai, K. 2003.  Irrigation Deve
lopment in Tamil Nadu. Mimeo. 
 Raveendaran, N. 1994.  
Consultancy Project on Marketing Pr
actices of Paddy and their Fiscal and Production Impact
.  Department of Agricultural Economics, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University.  Coimbatore.  (processed).   
 Rajagopalan, V.  2000. 
Problems and Prospects of Agricultural Development in Tamil Nadu.  Occasional Paper 13.  Mumbai: National Bank fo
r Agriculture and Rural Development.   
 Ramasamy, C. et al.  2003.  
Promoting Agricultural Developmen
t in Tamil Nadu: Perspectives, 
Dimensions and Potentials
.  (unpublished background paper by a team led by Prof. C. 
Ramasamy, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University).   
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU).  Crop Survey. 2001 (data files). 

 
van Koppen, B.,  R. Parthasarathy and C. Safiliou. 2003. 
Pro-Poor Irrigation Management 
Transfer. Water Policy Briefing Issue. 6. IWMI-Tata Water Policy Program. 
 
World Bank. 2004a. 
India Re-energizing the Agricultural Sector
, South Asia Rural Development 
Unit, Draft Report. 
 
-----------. 2004b.  
Agriculture Investment Sourcebook. 
Agriculture and Rural Development 
Department.  -----------. 2003a, The Incidence of Canal Irrigation Subsidies in India, A Policy Note
, South Asia 
Rural Development Unit, processed. 

    76----------. 2003b, Revitalizing Punjab™s Agriculture
, Policy Note, South Asia Rural Development, 
processed.  -----------.2003c. Promoting Agro-Enterprise and Agro-Food Systems Development in Developing 
and Transition Countries, Towards and Operational Strategy for the World Bank Group
, Report 26032, Washington: World Bank. 
 
------------.2003d. India Promoting Agricultural Growth in Maharashtra,
 Report No. 25415-IN, 
Washington, D.C.: South Asia Rural Development Unit, World Bank. 
 ----------.2001. India Power Supply to Agriculture, Report No. 22171-IN, Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank 
 
   
 
   4141

                The ploughers are the linch-pin of the world;              they bear Them up who other works perform, 
             too weak its toils to share.                                                                                     - Thirukkural 1032                                                                          
3.1 
 
AGRICULTURE
IntroductionAgriculture is a critical sector in the 
Indian economy.  Achieving a 8.2 percent of growth in the overall GSDP may not deliver 
much in terms of poverty reduction unless 
agricultural growth accelerates.  At the 

same time, ‚growth with inclusiveness™ can 

be achieved only when agricultural growth 

accelerates and is also distributed amongst 

the people and regions.  Agriculture has to 
be kept at the centre of any reform agenda 
or planning process, in order to make a 


and to ensure long-term food security of the 
people.Tamil Nadu has about 5.96 percent 
of Nation™s population, occupies 4 percent 

of the land area and has 3 percent of the 
water resources of the Nation.  In the State, 
agriculture provides livelihood to about 40 

percent of the population.  Hence, the State™s 
economy swirls around agriculture and allied 

sectors.  Therefore, any disturbance in the 



the State™s overall growth rate, ultimately 
leading to deceleration in its economic growth.  

Realizing agriculture sector™s importance, the 

Government of Tamil Nadu is taking all out 

efforts to usher in Second Green Revolution so 
as to enhance the farmers™ income by 2-3 times 
from the present level through appropriate 

land use, farm level planning through Farm 
Crop Management System (FCMS), moisture 



secondary agriculture, value addition and 

facilitated marketing.An Average Annual Growth Rate 
(AAGR) of 5.1 percent is envisaged for 
agriculture sector in Vision Tamil Nadu 

by 2023 and to achieve this target, the key 



promotion of market driven agricultural 
produce, b) accelerating innovation and 

extension mechanism, c) functional 
consolidation of land holdings, d) emphasis 

on mechanization, e) improving productivity, 

f) assurance of timely irrigation, g) creating 

robust supply chain and h) skill development 

in agriculture. Towards the infrastructure 
4141

                The ploughers are the linch-pin of the world;              they bear Them up who other works perform, 
             too weak its toils to share.                                                                                     - Thirukkural 1032                                                                          
3.1 
 
AGRICULTURE
IntroductionAgriculture is a critical sector in the 
Indian economy.  Achieving a 8.2 percent of growth in the overall GSDP may not deliver 
much in terms of poverty reduction unless 
agricultural growth accelerates.  At the 

same time, ‚growth with inclusiveness™ can 

be achieved only when agricultural growth 

accelerates and is also distributed amongst 

the people and regions.  Agriculture has to 
be kept at the centre of any reform agenda 
or planning process, in order to make a 


and to ensure long-term food security of the 
people.Tamil Nadu has about 5.96 percent 
of Nation™s population, occupies 4 percent 

of the land area and has 3 percent of the 
water resources of the Nation.  In the State, 
agriculture provides livelihood to about 40 

percent of the population.  Hence, the State™s 
economy swirls around agriculture and allied 

sectors.  Therefore, any disturbance in the 



the State™s overall growth rate, ultimately 
leading to deceleration in its economic growth.  

Realizing agriculture sector™s importance, the 

Government of Tamil Nadu is taking all out 

efforts to usher in Second Green Revolution so 
as to enhance the farmers™ income by 2-3 times 
from the present level through appropriate 

land use, farm level planning through Farm 
Crop Management System (FCMS), moisture 



secondary agriculture, value addition and 

facilitated marketing.An Average Annual Growth Rate 
(AAGR) of 5.1 percent is envisaged for 
agriculture sector in Vision Tamil Nadu 

by 2023 and to achieve this target, the key 



promotion of market driven agricultural 
produce, b) accelerating innovation and 

extension mechanism, c) functional 
consolidation of land holdings, d) emphasis 

on mechanization, e) improving productivity, 

f) assurance of timely irrigation, g) creating 

robust supply chain and h) skill development 

in agriculture. Towards the infrastructure 
42development in agriculture, `40,000 crore has been proposed in the Vision Tamil Nadu 
2023.Tamil Nadu performs well  in the all India scenario in productivity of major 
food crops.  It ranked (2009-10) second 
in productivity of rice next to Punjab. 
(Agricultural Statistics at a Glance, 2011, 



case of maize and oilseeds productivity.  The 


productivity surpassing Karnataka and 

Gujarat.  Similarly, in productivity of 

sugarcane, it is the Numero Uno State and 

its productivity is nearly 45 percent more 
than the National average.  In the case of 

vegetables and fruits productivity, it ranked 



level.The issues and challenges of 
the agricultural sector is complex. The 

productivity has stagnated in the recent years 


b) depleting water resources, c) escalating 

inputs costs, d) increased incidence of 



health as a consequence of indiscriminate 

use of chemical inputs, f) low level of post 
harvest technology, g) uncertain market 

prospects, and h) relatively higher incidence 

of indebtedness of farmers (Swaminathan, 
2010). In addition to the above, marginalization 
of land holdings, high variability in rainfall 

distribution, pressure of expanding habitat 

intruding into farm space, inadequate capital 

formation by the public sector and declining 
public investment in agriculture affect the 

agricultural performance in the State.  Salient Features of AgricultureThe salient features of Tamil Nadu's 




present concentration of cultivation from 

water intensive crops like rice and sugarcane 

to more nutritious but less water consuming 

crops like pulses, millets, oilseeds and so 

on in terms of total irrigated land and b) 

predominance of small and marginal farmers 
in overall agriculture production. Dominance of Small and Marginal 
FarmersThe distribution of landholding is 
skewed towards small and marginal farmers 
and the average size of holding is low.  The 

semi-medium, medium and large farmers 

accounted for a small proportion (9 percent) 

of the holdings but operating a higher 

proportion (41 percent) of the total area.  The 

average size of holding was higher in the 
case of large farmers (20.59 ha.) followed 

by medium farmers (5.61 ha).  The overall 
average size of land holding had come down 

from 0.83 ha. in 2005-06 to 0.80 ha. in 2010-

11. (Graph 3.1.1). Graph 3.1.1: Land Holding Pattern in Tamil Nadu (in Lakh Nos) Source : Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTNThe reduction in land holding size in 
Tamil Nadu directly affects the productivity 

as the farmer would not be able to afford 
the investments required for technological 
improvements. Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 

envisages functional consolidation of holdings 

through cooperative farming, contract farming 

and other mechanisms such as farmer 

groups and joint liability groups and implies 

the urgent need to increase the penetration 

of modern agricultural technologies and 

improve output.62.66 (77%)
11.82, (15%)
5.02 (6%)
1.51, (2%)
0.17(0.2%)
Marginal
Small
Semi Medium
Medium
Large
4343Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTN Declining Net Cultivated AreaRapid urbanization and related factors 

area in the State. An analysis of time series 

data on net cultivated area and land put to 

non-agricultural uses in the State clearly 

reveals the above fact. (Graph. 3.1.2)  Land 
put to non-agricultural purposes increased 

from 9.8 percent in 1950s to 14.56 percent in  

1990s and reached 16.17 percent in 2000s, 

which is mainly due to urbanization and 
industrialization.  The trend in decrease in 

net area sown was analyzed and the net area 
sown came down from 56.38 Lakh hectares 
(L.ha) in 1950s to 50.22 L.ha. in 2000s though 

it had registered some increase during the 

mid 60s and 70s.  The main challenges faced 


deterioration in soil health due to depletion 
of top soil and decline in organic content, 

marginalization of landholdings, dwindling 

ground water resources, shortage of labour 

force, declining cropping intensity and poor 

adoption of crop management practices.  The 
Twelfth Five Year Plan will make efforts to 

address these issues by bringing back the 
fallow lands under cultivation of oilseeds, 

pulses and millets.Review of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan PerformanceMany initiatives were undertaken during the Eleventh Five Year Plan apart from implementing various schemes.  As 
against the outlay of 
`2885.90 crore for Crop 

Husbandry sector, an amount of 
`3063.04 crore was spent (106 percent). The actual 
expenditure is much more under Government 

of India and World Bank projects.  The 

expenditure is higher than the outlay due to 
the implementation of National Agricultural 
Development Programme (NADP), National 

Food Security Mission (NFSM), Integrated 

Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and 

Maize (ISOPOM), Crop Insurance Schemes, 

Seeds Multiplication Scheme of paddy, 

millets, pulses, oilseeds and cotton and 

World Bank assisted Tamil Nadu Irrigated 

Agriculture Modernization and Waterbodies 

Restoration and Management Project (TN 

IAMWARM) etc.For effective delivery of quality 
inputs and extension services, additional 

initiatives such as establishment of 18 Seed 

Testing Laboratories, nine new Bio Fertilizer 

Production Labs in addition to six existing 

units, 11 Soil Testing Laboratories, Agri Clinic 

cum Mini Soil Testing Laboratories at one per 

block, Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) for 

medium range weather forecast in 224 blocks 

and 79 seed storage godowns to store 79,000 


Further, Agriculture Information Service 

Network (AGRISNET) was developed as an 

Information, Communication and Technology  



information by restructuring the whole State 
Graph 3.1.2: Shrinking Net Area Sown0102030405060701950-511953-541956-571959-601962-631965-661968-691971-721974-751977-781980-811983-841986-871989-901993-931995-961998-992001-022004-052007-082010-11non
-agri.use
Netarea sown
44extension system and bringing the entire line 
departments under one umbrella. Agricultural Growth during the 
Eleventh Five Year PlanIn the Eleventh Plan, a target of 4 percent growth rate in agriculture and allied 


plan period (2007-08 & 2008-09), a negative 
growth rate of 4.69 percent and 2.70 percent 
respectively was observed in the Agriculture 

(including livestock sector).  (Table 3.1.1).Table 3.1.1: Growth rate of Agriculture & Allied Activities and Agriculture (2004-05 prices) (in percentage) YearAgriculture 
and allied activitiesAgriculture2007-08
2008-09
2009-10 (RE)
2010-11(QE)
2011-12 (AE)-4.41
-2.296.14
4.54
7.08-4.46
-2.706.31
4.20
7.98Average          

(5 Years)2.212.22Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTNThough the growth rate in agriculture 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the average agriculture growth in the Eleventh Five Year 

Plan period registered a positive growth of 

2.22 percent as it recovered in the later years 

due to the favourable conditions in 2010 to 

2012.  The negative growth during 2007-
08 was due to the crop damage caused by 
natural calamities.  In spite of the crop loss 

due to Nisha cyclone, agriculture growth had 

shown recovery during 2008-09, due to many 

initiatives taken by the Government. In 2009-

10, 2010-11 and 2011-12, the agriculture 

sector revived with a positive growth of 6.31 

percent, 4.20 percent and 7.98 percent 



rains in the northeast monsoon, adoption 

of technologies such as System of Rice 


and also a high contribution from the dairy 

sector. However, the growth level continues 

to be less than adequate and well below the 

target set for the State.Area, Production and Productivity 
of Major Crops
Rice 
Rice is the staple food occupying 33 percent of the gross area sown.  Of the total 
rice area, 93 percent is irrigated and balance 

is under rainfed lands mostly under semi-
dry conditions. The normal area under rice 

is 19.32 L. ha and production is 56.63 L.MT.Table 3.1.2: Area, Production and Yield of Major Agricultural CropsYear Area (L. ha)Production (L.MT.)Yield (Kg/ha.)
PaddyMil-
letsFood grainsRiceMil-
letsFood 
grainsRiceMillets
2006-07 (Terminal 
Year of 10th FYP)2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12  (third 
adv.est)19.3117.8919.32
18.46
19.06
20.286.986.997.24
6.53
6.31
8.0531.6630.9731.92
30.34
31.74
37.1666.1150.4051.83
56.65
57.92
75.9613.6213.5717.51
16.35
15.57
24.3182.6465.8271.01
75.04
75.95
103.85342328172682
3070
3039
3746195019412419
2504
2468
3022Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTN 4545Rice production during the Plan 
increased from 66.11 L.MT (2006-07) to 75.96 
(2011-12) L.MT.  Due to natural calamities, 
rice production in the State was around 

50-52 L.MT during initial years of the Plan.  

Productivity of rice increased from 3423 kg/

ha (2006-07) to 3746 kg/ha. (2011-12). Technical Intervention for Rice 
Production In Tamil Nadu, System of Rice 

introduced in a big way in the year 2007-
08 and efforts were taken to popularize the 

technology and for its adoption over a larger 

area.  In the year 2007-08, 4.21 L.ha. paddy 

area was brought under SRI out of total 

paddy area of 17.89 L.ha. which was only 24 
percent.  Productivity achievement under SRI 

was 4051 kg/ha. increase of 66 percent over 
the conventional method.  With the objective 

of increasing rice production in districts 

wherein potential exists to expand area and 

increase productivity, National Food Security 

Mission (NFSM) is being implemented in 

Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, 

Ramanathapuram and Sivagangai districts.  

Implementation of Seed Multiplication /Seed 

Village schemes has resulted in increased 

seed replacement rate to 68 percent against 


of India.MilletsThe main reasons for drastic 
reduction of area under millets over the 



wheat, less returns to farmers, absence of 

added economic value based food items, 

changing lifestyle of the people, mismatch 

between minimum support price and cost 

of cultivation, less area under irrigation and 

cultivation of local varieties.Millets occupy 11 percent of the 
gross area sown and the major millets 
cultivated are Cholam, Cumbu, Maize and 

Ragi.  Normal area under millets is 7.07 L.ha 

and production is 15.57 L.MT. Technical 

interventions such as adoption of millet based 
cropping system, use of hybrids, precision 

farming and implementation of schemes 

such as procurement and distribution of 

millet seeds, ISOPOM-Maize, NADP and 

Seed Village scheme brought in substantial 

improvement in productivity and production. 



production from 13.62 L.MT to 24.31 L.MT 
and productivity enhanced from 1950 kg/

ha to 3022 kg/ha. during the Eleventh 

Five Year Plan period. Maize, being a highly 

remunerative crop also paved the way for 
shift in cropping pattern and increase in area 
under millets. Area under maize registered an 

increase from 1.97 to 3.44 L.ha. production 
increased from 7.59 to 17.81 L.MT and yield 

increased from 3888 to 5176 kg/ha. during 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  Pulses Pulses occupy nearly 11 percent of 
the gross area sown in the state of which 
only 8.73 percent is irrigated.  Normal area 

under pulses is 5.80 L.ha and the normal 
production is 2.24 L.MT. With an objective of 

increasing the production and productivity of 

pulses and bridging the demand Œ supply gap, 
pulses were promoted as pure crop under 

irrigated condition on cluster basis. Suitable 

strategies were adopted in rice fallow pulses 

and rainfed areas under NFSM.  Similarly, 
foliar spraying of 2 percent DAP from 2007-08, 



2010-11 under NADP and implementation 

of Accelerated Pulses Production Programme 

(A3P) from 2010-11 with an objective to 

bring a compact area of 1000 hectares per 
unit purely under pulses helped the State to 

increase pulses production.Food grains 
The area and production of food 
grains registered an increase from 31.66 L.ha 

to 37.16 L.ha and 82.64 L.MT to 103.85 L.MT 
respectively during the Eleventh Five Year 



programmes such as NFSM, A3P and NADP 
led to considerable increase in the area and 
production of food grains. 46Cotton 
Cotton occupies nearly 2 percent 
of the gross area sown.  The normal area 
under cotton is 1.09 L.ha. with a production 

of 2.24 lakh bales (170 kg lint each).  With 

an objective to increase the production 

and productivity of cotton, schemes viz., 

procurement and distribution of cotton seeds, 

Technology Mini Mission-II for cotton, NADP 

and increasing production of cotton using 

growth promoter-Naphthalene Acetic Acid 
(NAA), TNAU cotton plus and micronutrient 

mixture were implemented in the State. 

The major technological interventions like 
adoption of precision farming, micro irrigation 

systems such as drip and sprinklers at 
subsidized cost motivated cotton growers to 

take up cultivation extensively. The area and 
production increased from 1.00 L.ha to 1.45 
L.ha. and from 2.21 L.bales to 3.78 L.bales 
respectively during the Eleventh Five Year 

Plan period. Sugarcane 
Sugarcane is a major irrigated crop of 
the State next to rice which plays a vital role 

in the State™s economy.  It is a high water 

and labour intensive crop occupying 5.5 

percent of the gross area sown. The normal 

area, production and productivity of the crop 
is 3.38 L. ha. 375.23 L.MT and 108 MT (cane) 
per ha respectively.  In the year 2011-12, the 

area, production and productivity were 3.82 

L. ha. 393.67 L. MT and 108 MT (cane) per 

ha. respectively.Oilseeds 

productivity of oilseeds in the country.  

Oilseeds occupy 7.7 percent of the gross area 

sown.  Major oilseeds grown in Tamil Nadu are 


The normal area under oilseeds was 5.56 

L.ha. of which groundnut occupies 4.75 L.ha. 

The normal production of oilseeds is 11.13 

L.MT. Normal production and productivity of 

groundnut are 9.93 L.MT and 2323 kg per 
 ha. respectively.During 2007-08, almost all the 
districts witnessed low productivity and the 

State recorded 1747 kg per ha. from an area 

of 6.59 L.ha. resulting in production of 11.52 
L.MT.  In the succeeding years, even though 

the area declined substantially, productivity 

in most of the districts was found to be higher 

with reference to the State average.  During 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan, components 

such as procurement and distribution of 

quality seeds, combined nutrient spray 

under ISOPOM, micro irrigation and gypsum 

distribution for groundnut under NADP 



were recorded. There was a 48 percent yield 

increase with water saving to an extent 
of 30-40 percent and higher oil content 

was recorded under precision farming.  

Factors attributed for steady increase in the 


seeds, b) promotion of micro irrigation in a 

larger extent, c) encouragement of farmers 

by the adoption of seed village scheme and 

d) Integrated Nutrient and Pest Management 

(INPM).HorticultureMajor initiatives taken during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan for increasing the 
area coverage and productivity were precision 

farming, micro irrigation and fertigation, 

protected cultivation, rejuvenation of old 

orchards, organic farming, hi-density 

planting and canopy management.4747During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, 
the State schemes viz., the Integrated 
Horticulture Development Scheme -IHDS 
(`29.84 crore), Integrated Tribal Development 
Programme - ITDP (
`2 crore), Western Ghats 

Development Project (WGDP) and Hill Area 

Development Programme (HADP) (
`12.38 
crore) and NADP (
`182.45 crore) were 

implemented.  The Government of India 

shared schemes like National Horticulture 
Mission -NHM (
`565.43 crore), Micro 
Irrigation (
`353.34 crore), National Bamboo 
Mission ŒNBM (
`4.28 crore), National Mission 

on Medicinal plants (
`21.72 crore) were 

implemented. The State also implemented 

the World Bank assisted IAMWARM project 

(`42 crore).  Under precision farming, an 

extent of 22294 ha was brought and 1238 
clusters were established during 2008-11.  

During Eleventh Five Year Plan period, an 
area of 72531 ha. was covered under micro 

irrigation.National Horticulture Mission 
(NHM)National Horticulture Mission is 



The scheme is implemented on a mission 
mode from 2005-06 and aims at holistic 

development of horticulture with focus 

on expansion of area under high income 
generating horticulture crops.  The scheme 

is implemented in 22 districts.  Components 



high value horticulture crops, b) production 

of planting materials, c) rejuvenation of 

old orchards, d) canopy management, e) 

protected cultivation, f) organic farming, g) 

mechanization, h) post harvest management, 

i) creation of marketing infrastructure and j) 

human resources development.    Table 3.1.3: Area, Production and Yield of Horticultural CropsYearArea(L ha.)Production (L MT)Productivity (Tonnes/ha.)
FruitsVeg
Spice and Cond.Plantation
cropsFruitsVeg
Spices and Cond.Plant 
cropsFruitsVeg
Spices and Cond.Plant 
crops2006-07 
(Terminal 
Year of 
10th FYP)3.772.381.482.3369.4073.518.027.9225.8030.385.653.40
2007-083.862.391.452.3167.7876.617.397.9824.2131.405.28
3.452008-093.882.241.462.4668.0371.868.639.8523.0628.525.604.00
2009-103.902.841.442.3063.2758.728.0410.1821.7126.225.774.42
2010-11 
(P)3.902.271.522.6579.6583.879.3511.4724.8930.725.664.31
2011-12 
(esti-
mated)3.322.841.732.7585.3590.5210.8711.9925.6931.876.284.36
Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics and Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN48Performance of Access to Inputs 
SeedsSeed  availability  and  Seed  Replacement 
Rate (SRR) remained inadequate and below 
 the desired levels, thereby hindering 
production.  There was also a mismatch in the 
demand for and supply of seeds of different 

varieties.  The desirable SRR is around 33 

percent for self-pollinated crops like paddy, 

ragi, pulses, groundnut, gingelly etc, 50 
percent for cross-pollinated crops such as 

cholam, cumbu and cotton and 100 percent 

for hybrids.  The present SRR of all the crops 

is higher except for pulses and oilseeds.  The 

SRR achieved during 2011-12 was 68 percent 

for paddy, 55 percent for millets, 20 percent 

for pulses, 15 percent for oilseeds and 100 

percent for cotton.  The Government is taking 

various steps to ensure the availability of 

quality seeds to the farming community. The 
SRR during 2011-12 is shown in the Table 

3.1.4.Table 3.1.4: Seed Replacement Rate of Major Agricultural Crops Œ 2011-12S. No.Crop
Total requirement(in tonnes)Dept.-C seeds(in tonnes)Private-C /TFL seeds. (in tonnes)SRR achieved(percent)12
3
4
5Paddy
Millets
Pulses
Oilseeds
Cotton11000012153
24000
80652555180004504500
6376100572506243300571645568
55
20
15100Source: Policy note-2011-12 of Agriculture Department, GoTNAs against the target of 2.24 L.ha. to 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, an area of 2.47 
L.ha. was registered and a quantity of 3.91 

L.MT (as against the target of 4.02 L.MT) 

Organic Certification
assure quality of organic products and aims at 
regulating and facilitating the sale of organic 



Department (TNOCD) was established in the 

year 2007-08 to carry out inspection and 



in accordance with National Programme for 

Organic Production (NPOP). TNOCD has been 

accredited by Agricultural and Processed Food 

Products Exports Development Authority 

(APEDA), New Delhi. The Department imparts 

free training to registered organic farmers on 
NPOP and TNOCD standards. During the 

year 2007-08, 5244 acres were registered 


considerably in the last four years and 28115 

acres have been registered under organic 





organic seed production through local seed 

banks, production of bio inputs as a part of 
fertilizer and pesticide production, facilitation 

of transition from chemical to organic farming 
through a government programme, strict 

protection to organic farms, dissemination of 



for organic produce.FertilizersNeed based application of fertilizers is 
recommended to get maximum productivity and any excess or inadequate application will 
result in lower productivity. As against the 

distribution target of 50.75 L.MT for inorganic 
fertilizers, 36.76 L.MT have been distributed 



Five Year Plan.  In case of Blue Green Algae 
4949(BGA), as against the target of 2.65 L.MT 
only 1.57 L.MT have been produced and 
distributed to the farmers during the same 
period.  Per hectare consumption of fertilizer 
in the state has increased from 40 kg per 
ha in 1970-71 to 194 kg per ha. in 2007-08 
(nearly 5 fold increase).   The Government of 
India has announced the policy of grant on 

Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) and in this 

context, awareness creation on the use of 
need based optimal application of fertilizers 

and Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) is 

a must and needs to be scaled up.    Pesticides Nearly 20 percent production loss has been estimated due to pests and 
disease incidence and to prevent such 

loss, a perfect monitoring is essential. 

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is being 

popularized extensively.  By this, the State™s 
consumption of technical grade pesticides 

which was 10,926 MT during 1984-85 has 
now been brought down to 2,335 MT.  Apart 
from this, the use of bio-pesticides and bio 

control agents were encouraged. Localized 

production of these bio-pesticides needs to 

be encouraged and support facilities to be 



technical knowledge transfers. Agricultural Mechanisation            At present (2011-12), 94 bull 
dozers, 165 tractors, 31 combine harvesters 
and 2 hydraulic excavators are hired out to 

farmers through the Agricultural Engineering 

Department (AED).  The available machinery 

in the AED is not adequate to meet the 

requirement of the farmers. During the 

Eleventh Five Year Plan under NADP, 50 
percent subsidy assistance to the tune 

of `162.20 crore was given to farmers 
for promotion of agricultural machinery 

and 7807 power tillers, 3414 rotovators, 

987 paddy transplanters, 765 paddy 

combine harvesters and 48,144 numbers of 

agricultural machinery / implements were 

procured.  Also, under the centrally sponsored 


Mode Programme, agricultural machinery/ 
implements were popularized among the 

farming community so as to supplement the 

available farm power, to meet out shortage of 
agricultural labourers, to ensure timeliness 

in carrying out various farm operations and 
to increase agricultural production.  Subsidy 

assistance was given to farmers to the tune 
of `38.15 crore which includes the State 
share of `3.81 crore to procure 1072 tractors, 
7730 power tillers, 1535 rotovators and 572 

agricultural implements.Scheme for Replacing Old Pumpsets 
with New Efficient Pumpsets
pumpsets is poor as the farmers are using 

poor discharge compared to their rated 

horsepower. In order to overcome these 

setbacks and with an aim to save electricity, 

subsidy assistance was provided to farmers 

for replacing their old pumpsets and 

renewal of electrical accessories. During the 

Eleventh Five Year Plan, this programme was 

implemented to replace 45778 old pumpsets 



subsidy of `30.66 crore. Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017)Strategy
Revitalizing Agriculture 
Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 envisages that 
infrastructure development in agriculture are 

a) improving the productivity in agriculture, 

b) assurance of year round irrigation and 

c) marketing extension. With this in view, 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan has focused on 
strategies to achieve an AAGR of 5.0 percent 

in agriculture and allied sector. The hiatus in agriculture is mainly 
due to deteriorating soil health, declining 

water resources, inadequate investment in 

rural infrastructure, inadequate research 50& development activities and spiraling 
prices of inputs, change in the mindsets of 

people viewing agriculture as of low value.  

To break this hiatus, the government is 
actively formulating farmer/farm oriented, 



with adequate investment in developing 

rural infrastructure to augment agricultural 
production.Farmers are motivated to adopt 
professional approach in agriculture by 

measures such as bringing fallow lands 

under cultivation, adoption of two-pronged 

approach to obtain high productivity by 

identifying districts having large cropped area 

but less productivity and districts having 

high productivity but less cropped area, 



high productivity, promotion of zonewise 



adoption of frontier production technologies 

are proposed.  In addition to this, multiple 

concession to agro based industries and 

nutritional security through Nutri-cereals 
Promotion Programme will be encouraged.The major strategies to spur 
SECOND GREEN REVOLUTION are:

Improved Pulses production technologies 



as Whole Village Concept, Sustainable 

Sugarcane Initiatives (SSI) and Precision 

Farming for agricultural and horticultural 

crops are proposed to bridge the yield gap. 
infrastructure and promoting primary 
producer owned agri business ventures.
diversifying the cultivation in favour of 
high value, organic horticulture and 
commercial crops while ensuring food and 
nutritional security for all.
- Assessing the requirement of agricultural 
inputs by conduct of meeting at village panchayat level and bottom up planning 

will be given priority so as to meet the 

local needs effectively and ensuring 

availability of adequate quantity of inputs 

in appropriate time and that are to be 

locally produced.
saline and alkaline soil, issue of Farmers™ 

Integrated Handbooks (FIHB).


use of irrigation water Œ Promoting 

horticulture technologies and micro 

irrigation as whole village concept.
services to all farm families in Tamil 

Nadu-Farm level interventions for 'end-

to-end' involvement of extension staff with 
individual farmer Œ Conducting pre season 
village campaigns (Uzhavar Peruvizha) 
in close coordination with the all allied 

sectors.
and agriculture innovation and excellence 
by the farmers
as  power /cono weeders and markersIn Tamil Nadu, agricultural operations 
are constrained by sub-optimal water 

resources to a great extent.  To ensure ﬁmore 

crop/income per drop of waterﬂ, special 

emphasis will be given for the cultivation of 

high value Œ less water intensive crops for 

effective land use system.
be increased by enhancing productivity of 

per unit of water for which strategies such 

as mass adoption of Micro Irrigation Mission  

approach, promotion of Precision Farming, 

SSI, SRI and Rainwater Harvesting structures 

for recharging groundwater are proposed.LandThe conversion of lands for various 
purposes has to be regulated and at the same 5151time it cannot be entirely dispensed with, as rapid growth is possible only if agriculture 
and other activities go hand in hand.  The 

Union Planning Commission highlights the 

decline in net area sown due to diversion 

of agricultural lands for urbanization and 

industrialization purposes. It has also 

suggested that reasonable restrictions on 

acquisition of multi-crop irrigated land should 

be laid and wherever net area sown is less 
than 50 percent of total geographical area, 

the State concerned should necessarily set 

a cap on cultivable area to be acquired. The 
Government of Tamil Nadu has passed an Act 

prohibiting unnecessary and unwarranted 

diversion of agricultural lands to other 

purposes wherein District Collector has been 

authorized to impose restrictions in case 



Similar to forest land conversions, strategies 

may be adopted to ensure optimal land usage 

to protect food and nutritional security.Following are the initiatives that have 
been contemplated to achieve the goals set 
in the Twelfth Five Year Plan to overcome the 

The ongoing schemes such as National 
Agricultural Development Programme, 

National Food Security Mission, National 

Horticulture Mission, Procurement and 

Distribution of paddy, millets and pulses, 

Crop Insurance including Weather Based 

Insurance Scheme, Oilseeds Production 

Programme, Horticulture Development 
Programme will be continued during the 

Twelfth Five Year Plan. However, in view of 

the increased importance being given to the 
enhancing agricultural growth and farm 

income, a set of new schemes will be initiated 

to achieve the targeted growth of the Twelfth 

Five Year Plan.New InitiativesFarm Level PlanningWith the objective of increasing the income of small and marginal farmers by 2-3 times from 
the present level, it is proposed to increase 

the cropping intensity, irrigation intensity, 

productivity by 50 percent and above and  

bringing fallow lands under cultivation. The 

Government has taken initiatives to ensure 





ensure sustainable agricultural production, 

the Department of Agriculture has envisaged 

farm level interventions through   ﬁFarm 

level planningﬂ.  The prime objectives 

are to enable farmers to adopt improved 

cultivation methodology and techniques 

in  their landholding, to provide linkages 

and easy access to critical inputs in time, 

enable farmers to use most appropriate farm 
machinery to reduce drudgery, labour cost 

and get higher production and productivity, 

to empower farmers with complete access 

to the information related to his farming 
operations, extension functionaries to become 

a friend and guide of farmers throughout 

the cultivation cycle.  To achieve the above 

objectives, the following activities are to be 



irrigation status.
every farm.
at village, block and district level through 

ISMS. Online input monitoring system in 
the Agricultural Extension Centres along 
52with customized billing has also been proposed.
to match the inputs supply with demand 
by sharing continuously the available 
information among the stakeholders 

through internet on AGRISNET portal.
farm at critical stages; make bio metric 

observations with still photos and video 

clippings. 
on the assessment of production to get 
remunerative prices for the produce.   Farm Crop Management 
System(FCMS) Integrated Farming System (IFS)The threefold increase in farmer™s income will be possible with farm level 
interventions by adopting Integrated Farming 

System (IFS) approach. So far, the extension 

efforts were generic by increasing the 

production through intensive cultivation. It is 

imperative for farmers to adopt agricultural 

production with horticulture, animal 


Farming Systems Approach. Based on the 

resources available, a farm based plan needs 

to be developed for harnessing the synergy 

among the enterprises which will ultimately 

provide a higher income. So far, no such plan 

was formulated by the extension system. With 

this in view, during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, 

it is proposed to take up activities such as 

collection of basic data on allied enterprises, 

categorizing the villages based on the micro 
climatic conditions, development of crop 

plans in relation to soil type, irrigation and 

rainfall and integrating with other enterprises 



net income, facilitation for timely availability 

of inputs, credit, insurance, farm machinery 

besides technologies, periodical monitoring 

by extension functionaries for corrective 
measures in scheme implementation, 
providing market intelligence and instant 
expert advice on farm related issues. 

Considering this, an Integrated Farming 

System Model Village will be organized in all 

blocks.As an ICT initiative, the basic 
information along with the farm resource 

inventory is maintained in Farmer Database 

of AGRISNET portal. Mostly this information 

is relevant to the agricultural sector alone 
and now it has been planned to maintain 

information about other enterprises too.  

Further it has been planned to provide 

information to farmers through Personal 

Digital Assistants (PDAs), Touch Screen 

Kiosks, SMS gateway etc. Soil Health Management - Farmer™s 
Integrated Hand Book (FIHB)Soil samples from all the 81.13 
lakh farm holdings will be collected and 
analysed for macro and micro nutrients with 


pattern. The data will be digitized and linked 

to AGRISNET Portal for easy retrieval.As a part of farm level interventions, it 
is proposed to distribute Farmer™s Integrated 

Hand Book, a fool proof record containing 

the personal information of farmers, soil 

test results, nutrient recommendations and 



for three years. This is being distributed 
to farmers to guide them in applying 

appropriate fertilizers and also to keep a 

record of farm wise/season wise production 

and productivity. FIHB empowers farmers to 

draw their own cropping programme, input 


Ensuring Quality Inputs Œ Input 
Supply Management System (ISMS)Efforts taken to ensure the availability 
of quality prime inputs like seeds, fertilizers, 
micro nutrients, bio-fertilisers, plant 

protection chemicals, credit, etc., to the 

farmers and to enable them to take up various 

cultivation activities in the appropriate 



assessed and made available in time by 

creating additional capacity with modern 
5353machinery and strengthening existing Seed 
Processing Units (SPUs). ii) Establishment 

of local seed banks, iii) Fertilizers Œ required 

quantity of fertilizers to be stocked in Primary 

Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societies 
(PACCS) and private and localized production 

of bio fertilizers to be facilitated and iv) 

Credit requirement of the farmers assessed 

and arranged through cooperatives and 

nationalized banks.Extension with Renewed Vigour 
by Extensive Use of Information 

TechnologyPresent day agriculture is technology 
propelled and so extension coupled with 
information technology is pivotal for 

transforming agriculture into information 
packed genre to enable farmers in accessing 

innovative technologies for which the 

all farm families by Farmer Database 
Management System (FDMS) through 
mobile application.
functionaries enabled with General Packet 

Radio Service (GPRS), Geo Information 

System (GIS), Global Positioning System 

(GPS) and Pico mini projector for 
implementation of Farm Crop Management 

System (FCMS).
dissemination and farmer™s data updation 
through Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
block level - empowering farmers to 
have an access for information on input 

availability, agriculture technology, 

market information apart from farm plan.
services to all farm families in Tamil Nadu.

enriching the awareness level of farmers 
on farm technologies. Considering the 



the existing Community Radio Station 

functioning at Coimbatore, it is proposed 
to establish 28 Community Radio Stations 
in the TNAU - Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVK).
Reckoner Hand book and pocket book. 
Eight types of farmers guide booklet 
covering food grains, commercial crops, 

annual and perennial horticultural crops, 

soil and water conservation, agricultural 

marketing, technologies of TNAU and 

watershed programmes have been 
prepared.
input distribution and testing of soil 
samples through agri-clinics.
will act as a platform for information 

dissemination between farmers, farmers 
groups and extension functionaries and 


problems related to agriculture and sister 
departments at one spot.
to achieve the targets set below in the Table 3.1.5.54Table 3.1.5: Twelfth Plan Targets Œ Agriculture and Horticulture CropsS. No.CropArea (L.ha)Production (L.MT)Productivity (kg./ha.)
2010-11 
(base)2016-172010-11
(base)2016-172010-11
(base)2016-
17123
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
121314
15Paddy/ Rice-
Conventional
Rice- SRI
Total-Rice
Millets
Pulses
Food grains
Cotton
Sugarcane
Oilseeds
Fruits
Vegetables
Spices & Condi-

ments
Plantation crops
Medicinal Plant
Flowers10.568.5019.066.31
6.3731.741.21
3.16
4.48
3.90
2.26
1.662.650.11
0.315.5016.50
22.00
15.00
12.00
49.001.65
3.73
7.21
4.42
3.79
2.303.670.16
0.4221.8036.1257.92
15.572.4675.952.48342.529.3379.65
83.879.3911.470.61 
3.0020.9779.04100.0160.0010.00170.005.36545.0016.74139.05
145.3617.4819.191.055.18206442503039
24683852393349.00102207824.89
30.725.664.315.55
9.67381347904546
40008343469552.00
146.00232231.46
38.467.605.236.5612.33Source: Dept. of Agriculture & Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTNNote:  Area in terms of Paddy, production and productivity in terms of rice. Productivity of horticulture and plantation crops (fruits, vegetables, spices and condiments, plantation, medicinal plants and 

New Interventions: System of Rice Intensification (SRI) 
Technology as a village conceptIn spite of introduction of SRI 
four years ago, yield gap still exists due to 
non-adoption of all critical technological 

components and this necessitates the 

promotion of SRI as a village concept. Under 

this concept, rice growing villages will be 

selected and promoted on cluster basis to 
ensure perfect adoption of the technology. 

This scheme will be implemented with the 

creation of community nursery; pooling 
and timely provision of resources / inputs 

such as water, seeds, fertilizers including 

bio-fertilizers, plant protection chemicals, 

machinery, etc; conduct of demonstration 


place, convincing the laggards of the same 
village and motivating the farmers of nearby 

villages; minimizing cost of cultivation by 

optimal and localized need based timely 

management of resources to augment 





locations will be attempted. The Government has announced 
prize money and a medal worth `3500 to 
encourage paddy cultivation using SRI 

technology.  Farmers who have cultivated 

paddy in minimum 50 cents of land and 
achieved a yield of more than 2500 kg of 

paddy in an acre are eligible to participate in 

the SRI yield contest.   5555System of Rice Intensification - SuitabilitySynergy of the recommended twelve 
critical steps of SRI, when adopted in toto, 
would lead to considerable increase in rice 

yield. In SRI, alternate wetting and drying is 

an important step to ensure root aeration. 
SRI should not be adopted where soil and 
water conditions are not suitable like low 

lying areas. While SRI adoption has been 

given more emphasis in the Twelfth Plan 
striving to achieve the target of 16.50 L. ha, 

care has to be taken to spread the SRI in the 
suitable areas only. Millets Mission 
In the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it is 
proposed to introduce an Integrated Millets 

Mission through a convergent approach 

by involving Department of Agriculture, 
Department of Civil Supplies and Consumers™ 

Protection as well as Department of 

Agricultural Marketing and Agri Business.   

Farmers all over the State will greatly be 





millets in PDS and creating business 

incubators for millets would help the millet 

farmers to a large extent. Agriculture and 
food production by the small and marginal 

farmers who are vulnerable will be improved 

by introduction of Millets Mission. Box 3.1.1: Snapshot of SPC 
Millets WorkshopState Planning Commission organised a workshop to promote millets 
in the State where the stakeholders 
from Government of India, Government 



Agriculture, Agricultural Marketing, 
Social Welfare, Health, Cooperation and 

Civil Supplies, Horticulture, Animal 

Husbandry, Research Institutions, 
Researchers, Academic Professionals, 
NGOs and Operational Functionaries 

like food processing entrepreneurs, 

farmers also were present.   The major 






concept, increasing area under millets by 

bringing in the fallow lands, incentivisation 

of small entrepreneurs, formation of millet 
clusters and CLGs. While the above will 
address the supply issues with regard to 

millets production, demand also needs to 

be generated by popularization of millets 


addition with millets, popularization of 

millet based nutrient diet and changing 

dietary habits.Source: State Planning Commission, GoTNIndia, despite being one of the 
emerging economies, is ranked as low as 128 
among the malnourished nations; i.e., lower 

than even some of the sub-Saharan African 

countries. A recent study has further indicated 
that almost 20 percent of all diabetes cases in 

India are due to rice consumption. A similar 

study in Tamil Nadu has revealed equal or 

higher incidence of diabetes. This needs 

immediate attention. Introducing millets 

in our diet which was in vogue during our 
ancestral period could resolve this anomaly. 



are way ahead of rice and wheat in terms 
of nutritional content. For instance, millets 

contain 10.6 grams of protein per kilogram, 

as against rice which contains only 6.8 grams.          56
grams to 10.1 grams), minerals (1.9 grams to 

4.4 grams) and calcium (31 mg to 344 mg) in 
comparison to rice. Millets are crops that can 

survive adverse climate change conditions. 

It has been shown that millets can grow in 

conditions of low rainfall requiring as little 

as 300 to 350 mm depending on the type of 

millet and in poor and heavily degraded soils, 

which are the characteristic traits of the arid 
and semi-arid regions of the State. All these 

characteristics make millets the ideal crop for 

the climate crisis that is looming ahead of our 

State. Twelfth Five Year Plan Strategy for 
Millets Production Millets Production EnhancementThe following strategies will be 
implemented during the Twelfth Five Year 

hybrids, local varieties and high yielding 
cultivars, especially for cholam and 

cumbu.  Care will be taken to ensure that 

this does not create new seed monopolies.

irrigation with fertigation to increase input 




utilization of rain water, especially in 

rainfed areas.
soil and moisture conservation through 
supply of dryland machinery at subsidized 
cost.
cost to reduce the cost of cultivation.
pure crop (irrigated condition) by providing 

adequate support mechanism in terms of 
seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, etc.System of Millets Intensification 
To demonstrate the improved 
production and post harvest technology in 

an integrated manner with visible impact 

to catalyze increased production of millets, 




distribution of  scarce indigenous varieties, 

c) supply of critical inputs, d) distribution of 

improved varieties / hybrids as minikit, e)

seed production and sensitizing the farmers 

on various local and indigenous technologies, 

f) generating consumers™ demand for millets 

based food products through awareness 

creation and g) processing and value addition 

techniques will be implemented in a massive 

way under various ongoing/new programmes.
Market LinkagesBusiness Incubators for Millets.  Ensuring millets and millet based 
value added foods in the ready-to-eat and 

ready-to-cook form is the need of the hour.  For 
this, establishment of business incubators is 

essential. Business incubators for processing 

of millets and production of millet based 

value added products will be established 

by entrepreneurs.  These incubators 

help to upscale processing methods for 

development of traditional foods, production 
of millet based bakery products, millet based 

extruded products, functional health mix, 

ready-to-cook, ready-to-eat convenience 
foods, low glycemic health foods and high 
5757
Mission, setting up these incubators is 

proposed and will be implemented through 
Department of Agricultural Marketing and 

Agri Business.Modernisation of Millet Processing Unit 
and Value Addition. Millets being small seeded, contain 
large proportions of husk and bran which 

requires de-husking and de-braning prior 

to consumption.  Despite their nutritional 

superiority, utilization of millets is restricted 



millets in ready-to-eat form.  Hence, millets 





processing units are essential to increase 

the availability of millets in the ready-to-use 

form.  Financial assistance for establishment 

of modern millets based processing units and 

modernization of existing millet processing 

units to increase the recovery percentage 

are the required strategies to achieve the 

objectives.  The proposed Millets Mission 

would extend such necessary assistance 

through Department of Agricultural 

Marketing and Agri Business.Distribution of Millets through PDS. 
Millets are also consumed by a certain 
percentage of high end consumers.  A study on preference of food grains indicated that 
consumers may be willing to increase the 

offtake of millets through PDS if it is made 

available at the outlets.  Hence, through the 
Millets Mission, it is suggested to provide 

three kg of any one of the available millets 
to all family card holders.  The family card 

holders eligible for rice could be provided with 
three kg of millets per month if requested 

at no additional cost.  The other category 

of family card holders will be provided with 

three kg of millets at subsidized rate. The 

total requirement of millets for 1.97 crore 

family card holders will be 59,100 tonnes/

month and their annual requirement would 

be seven L.MT. PulsesGenerally, production and productivity 
of pulses could not be matched with the 

increasing area since pulses are mostly raised 
Source: Tamil Nadu Agricultural UniversityBox 3.1.2: Garden Land Pulses 
(GLP)-Improved Pulse Production 
TechnologyThiru.L.Lingavanaickker, Padarn-thapuli,Thoothukudi district, a farmer for 

the past 20 years demonstrated with his 
2 ha. land under blackgram by adopting 

improved production technology in garden 
land pulses. The technologies like 2 % DAP 


15 days was adopted which prevented 



number of pods/plant (32-34 nos.) and 
also maturation of black gram. Farmer 
was able to get a net income of `25,000 in 

75 days with minimum water usage, lower 

cost of production and also enriching soil 

health.as rainfed, intercrop and bund crop and 
are more susceptible to pests and diseases.  

Further, there are no suitable varieties to 
match up the highest yield obtained by other 

States. Needless to say, an extent of about 

three lakh hectares which is under rice fallow 
pulses also pull down the overall production 

and productivity of the State. The constraints 


be maintained in blackgram and greengram 

under rice fallow conditions due to improper 

levelling, uncertainty in time of sowing and 

terminal moisture stress under rice fallow 

conditions resulting in poor yield. 58The following strategies will be 
adopted during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
growth inducer.


raising redgram through transplantation 

of seedlings. Short duration redgram 

varieties like ICPL 87, Vamban1, VBN(RG)3 
will be promoted in a larger area.
conditions in a compact area.
released by ICRISAT such as ICPL 87119, 

ICPH 7035, ICPL 88039, ICPH 2671 & ICP 

2740.
like raingun, mobile sprinkler, etc to 
increase pure pulses area under irrigated 
condition 
fallow pulses.
and implements such as rotovators, 

power tillers, mobile sprinkler / raingun, 

pumpsets, plant protection equipments, 
laser land leveller etc. 
Mission Mode approach by tapping the 
existing potential except in the delta 
districts.
ŒWhole Village  Concept.Long Term Strategies for Pulses. 
alternate varieties with high yielding 

traits. Enhanced seed rate to be adopted 

to maintain optimum plant population. 
Minimum Support Price and procurement 
of grain pulses through PPP. 
post harvest infrastructure to minimize 

the losses. 
periodical review and  to monitor the price 

escalation.
ponds in more numbers will help the 

farmers to raise pulses crop even during 

summer season.
to raise more area under pulses and to 

involve them in seed production / value 
addition by providing incentives. Improved Pulses Production 
Technologies- as Whole Village 

ConceptOrganizing pulses villages is a 
major initiative wherein various integrated 




disease resistant varieties, b) seed treatment 

with Rhizobium and Phosphobacteria, c) 

Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) and 

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) adoption, 
Box 3.1.3: 'Pulse Wonder'ﬁPulse Wonderﬂ a new crop booster developed by Tamil Nadu Agricultural 

University (TNAU) will be made available 

to farmers at half the original cost to be 

applied in 50,000 ha. in 1695 villages 

to enhance productivity of pulses. This 
announcement was made by the Hon™ble 

Chief Minister to encourage adoption of 

the novel innovation of TNAU as a growth 

regulator viz, auxins. The ‚Pulse Wonder™ 
mixture can be applied as foliar spray 
preferably in the morning or late evening  



pulses, particularly, for blackgram and 

greengram (35 days after sowing) to reduce 



the production by 10 to 20 percent. This 
mixture can be used in lieu of DAP spray.  
Source: Dept. of Agriculture, GoTN.5959d) maintenance of optimum population and 
e) spraying of 2 percent DAP twice and using 

of ‚TNAU pulse wonder™ are to be adopted.  

These are recommended to obtain yield not 

less than 1000 kg/ha. for redgram and 750 

kg/ha for other pulses like blackgram and 

greengram. To encourage the farmers in 

getting higher yield, crop yield competitions 

are proposed to be conducted in pulses crops 

wherein the farmers will be awarded with 

cash prize and medals.CottonCotton cultivation can be revived, 



Further, new schemes will be introduced for 
production and distribution of quality seeds, 
bio-agents, contract farming, commodity 

group formation, promotion of farm 

machinery such as cotton plucking machine. 

The following strategies will be focused to 

overcome the constraints in enhancement of 

production and productivity. 1) increasing 

the availability of treated quality seeds with 

an emphasis on de-linted seeds, 2) Promotion 
of micro irrigation to conserve water and 

bring more area under cotton especially 

in dryland areas, 3) area expansion and 
production improvement of irrigated cotton 

through precision farming and transfer of 
Box. 3.1.4: Campaign for 
Traditional farm products 
Hon™ble Chief Minister announced a special initiative for 
`10.00 crore to 

promote traditional agricultural products 
viz., tender coconut, soap nut powder 

and cotton clothing. These products are 

suitable to the climatic conditions of the 

State. But, increasing westernisation 

and globalisation has reduced demand 
for these products. A renewed awareness 
campaign will be conducted to improve 

the demand by products promotion, 
packaging and advertising.Source: Dept. of Agriculture, GoTN.technology, 4) promote localized supply of 

quality seeds to meet requirement as per 

the SRR targets, 5) training farmers on IPM 

aspects and encouraging the usage of bio-

inputs including bio-pesticides, 6) supply 

of plant protection equipments, micro 
nutrients, bio-fertilizers at  subsidized  cost 

and 7) facilitate localized processing of lint 

through appropriate indigenous technology 
developed. SugarcaneIt is planned to extend subsidy for 
sett treatment, purchase of machinery, 

cultivation of tissue culture canes and usage 

of weedicides to overcome the bottlenecks 

faced in sugarcane cultivation.  Further, the 


Initiatives (SSI) comprising innovative 

technologies like precision farming for 

increasing the production and productivity.

bud nursery under SSI. 
row method of planting saves about 40 

percent of water besides assured increase 
in cane yield, it is planned to cover one 


and marginal farmers and 75 percent to 
other farmers for installing drip irrigation 

with fertigation will be extended. 
sugarcane growers at subsidized cost.OilseedsThe focus is on the following strategies 


increasing the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) 

and enhance the quality seed availability 

through seed village scheme, 2) bringing more 

area under oilseeds through promotion of 

micro irrigation and bring back two percent of 

other fallow lands under oilseeds cultivation, 
603) adoption of INM, IPM and bio-fertilizers 
usage, 4) encouraging  farmers on usage of 

micro nutrients for increasing productivity 

as well as oil content and 5) application of 

gypsum in groundnut crop to increase the 

productivity.CoconutWith an objective of distributing quality 
coconut seedlings to farmers and make them 
aware of modern technologies, Demonstration 

cum Coconut Seedling Production Farm 

at Jallipatty village in Udumalpet taluk, 

Tiruppur district will be established through 

the Coconut Development Board (CDB). For 

this purpose, an extent of 82.66 acres of land 
will be earmarked to the Board. Besides, steps 

will be taken for increasing the production of 

Dwarf x Tall Hybrid and Dwarf variety coconut 

seedlings in the State Coconut Nurseries and 

for improving the infrastructure facilities in 

those farms.Soil and Water Management 
ApproachesDuring the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it is 
proposed to take up detailed soil survey with 
the objective of identifying saline and alkaline 

soils and to reclamation of the problem soils. 

It is also proposed to take efforts to develop 

irrigation sources such as farm ponds, 

check dams, percolation ponds, etc., to meet 

the irrigation water requirement of rainfed 

crops at critical stage, for which funds 

under various schemes viz., A3P, Initiatives 

for Nutritional Security through Intensive 
Millets Promotion (INSIMP) and Rainfed 

Area Development Programme (RADP) will 
be dovetailed. (Detailed proposals on soil 

management are dealt in the sub chapter viz., 
3.2. Soil and Water Conservation including 

Rainfed Farming) Precision FarmingPrecision farming is an innovative 
method in which all the cultivation protocols 

are undertaken very accurately. Key steps 

viz., chisel ploughing, transplanting of 

young seedling, adopting recommended 
spacing, installing drip and micro irrigation 
and timely application of critical inputs are 

followed.   Upon success of the programme 

and unprecedented level of acceptance of the 

technology by the farmers, the programme 



years. It is proposed to further expand the 
project to cover 1 lakh ha. under precision 
farming during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
period.  Further it is also proposed to form 

precision vegetable clusters with market 

tie up or direct marketing by farmers by 
incorporating producers companies.National Mission on Micro 
Irrigation (NMMI)The conventional method of irrigation 
requires more water leading to wastage.  The 
use of micro irrigation systems like drip, 



of surface as well as ground water resources.  

Each drop of water is made productive in this 

technology. Uniform crop growth and produce 

size are achieved through this method.  Using 

micro irrigation, more area can be brought 

under cultivation with less water.  NMMI 

is a centrally sponsored scheme,  in which  

100 percent subsidy is given to small and 

marginal farmers (50 percent by Centre and 

50 percent by State) and 75 percent (40 
percent by Centre and 35 percent by State) 
to other category farmers for installation of 

drip, sprinkler and raingun systems for all 
horticulture crops and agriculture crops 

like sugarcane, coconut, cotton, maize, 

groundnut and pulses.  This scheme is being 

implemented only through registered and 



Twelfth Five Year Plan period, it is proposed 

cover an area of 3.10 lakh ha. under micro 

irrigation (1.86 L.ha. under horticulture 

crops and 1.24 L.ha under agriculture crops).Micro Irrigation Model VillagesTo give a big push to extend the 
area coverage under micro irrigation, a 

model village in each district will be set up 

to demonstrate the advantages of micro 

irrigation.  It is also proposed to provide micro 

irrigation equipments at subsidised cost and 
impart training to the farmers.6161Approach and Strategies for 
Profitable Agriculture
according to the local demand and consumption
Government on pilot basis to promote 
sustainable agriculture and to provide 
technical assistance, design cropping 
pattern, supply of  inputs viz., seeds, 

fertilizers, plant protection chemicals, 

irrigation facilities, farm machinery, 

etc., post harvest management, food 

processing, market linkages etc.,
system and nursery to reduce the cost 

of cultivation in terms of consumption of 
inputs such as, seeds, fertilizers, water, 

labour, capital, etc. and to accelerate the 

pace of appropriate low cost mechanization.
possessed by small and marginal farmers 
and promotion of community based 
farming system, which will enable them to 

take up mechanized agriculture and other 
hi-tech farming practices without any 


enables the farmers to take up various 

enterprises at one place and ensures 

are mainly organized for supporting 

micro enterprises with the assistance of 
micro credit shall now be entrusted with 



As the size of the operational holdings 

decline day by day, the Government can 
promote SHGs to take up agriculture as a 
profession by providing agricultural lands, 

current fallows and wastelands on lease 

basis. This can be made viable only if they 
have backward linkages with technical 

backup and credit and forward linkages 
with processing and adequate market 

infrastructure.

and ensures assured and remunerative 
marketing opportunities. Promotion of 
primary producers™ cooperatives and 

corporate, that can adopt contract farming 


being ploughed back into the farming 
community.
Organic Farming Policy in the State to 

encourage toxic free organic farming 

besides ensuring food security. Inputs: Seeds, Fertilizers and other 
Inputs Seeds: Seed SystemsQuality seed is the key input for realizing potential productivity. The following 
initiatives will be focused in the Twelfth Five 



seeds and ensuring adequate stocks and 
timely supply of quality seeds to farmers  for 

which the State will prepare a comprehensive 

Seed Plan, b) Sensitizing farmers on 

production and usage of indigenous and 



entrepreneurs in quality seed production, d). 

Involving farmers, women SHGs, TANWABE 

groups and NGOs in local seed production and 
seed processing activities and e) Improving 

infrastructure facilities for seed production, 

processing and storage.Enhancing Seed Replacement Rate 
(SRR)An Action Plan for all the blocks has been prepared by incorporating details of crop 
wise / variety wise requirement of breeder 





would be prepared to meet the requirements 
indicated in the Action Plan with the following 



TNAU / ICAR Institutes to meet the breeder 
seed requirements, b) tie-up arrangements 




seed requirement for enhanced SRR, c) 

quality seed production, processing and 

distribution involving Farmers™ Interest 
62Groups (FIG), SHGs, TANWABE groups 
and NGOs, d) upgradation of infrastructure 

facilities including agricultural implements in 

the State Seed Farms (SSFs) to increase the 
cropping area to produce additional quantity 

of foundation seeds, e) enhancing the seed 
processing capacity by utilizing the  20 new 

SPUs in addition to the already existing SPUs 
in the Department of Agriculture and the 75 
new SPUs to be established involving farmers, 

women SHGs and NGOs with back ended 

subsidy and f) emphasizing the farmers to 

register their farms with the Department of 



through Seed Village programme  seed 

requirement. The following suggestions are given 

1) generation system of seed multiplication 

(NucleusŒBreederŒFoundationŒCertified) 

should be strictly followed, 2) strengthening 

of SSFs for quality seed production, 3) seed 
production on contract basis in farmers™ 



incentives and adequate infrastructure 
facilities like power,   irrigation, credit etc., 

for farmer operated seed production centres, 



areas, declaring as seed valley, provide safety 

from seed contamination and encouraging 



and storage and 7) increasing awareness 

on appropriate usage of  hybrid seeds by 

the  farmers.  The seed demand projection 
for major crops during  the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan is provided in Table. 3.1.6.Table 3.1.6: Seed Demand Projection  for Major Agricultural Crops - Twelfth Plan         
S.No.Crop2012-132013-142014-152015-162016-17
12
3
4
5Paddy
Millets
Pulses
Oilseeds
Cotton187004704949
6503102187004805050
6627104187004905150
6752106187005005256
6877108187005105362
7014110  Village Level Seed Bank for Rainfed 
Crops through Participatory 
ApproachWith the advent of hybrid technology, 
the farmers are required to replenish seeds 
every season from external sources such 

as research institutions, public and private 

sector seed producers to harness hybrid 

vigour. This has increased the productivity 



increased farmers™ dependence on external 
agencies. As a result, the informal and 

decentralized village seed industry has now 

been replaced by highly centralized seed 

market. However, it is almost impossible for 
the organized sector to meet farmers demand 
for the seed, considering the number of crops and varieties cultivated across the country.  

In this back drop, the concept of ‚seed village™ 



production and distribution of quality seeds, 

is fast gaining momentum. Seed villages 

or village seed banks operate with utmost 

transparency, mutual trust and social 
responsibility of the seed producing farmers 

towards seed using fellow farmers and under 

peer supervision. The establishment of village 

seed banks not only ensure good quality 
seeds for enhancing productivity, but also 

help in generating income for the community 
members resulting in improved livelihoods. It 

is proposed to form 7000 Commodity Interest 

Groups, 5000 village seed banks and to train 

1.25 lakh farmers.  6363Seed Certification
the involvement of private producers for 
producing more of millets, pulses and 

oilseeds crop seeds. Increased attention will 

be paid to meet timely availability of breeder 

seeds to the seed producers. To satisfy the 

need for quality seed distribution to the 


wing has proposed to certify 1.2 LMT of major 

crop seeds during the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan. Focus on strengthening the organic 



at the international standard will be done. 





as PGS will be promoted.  It is also proposed 

to establish laboratories for testing samples 

of soil, water, pesticides, residues, heavy 

metals and food products accredited by 

National Accreditation Board for Testing and 

Calibrating Laboratories (NABL).     Fertilizers Soil Nutrient ManagementIntensive cropping, indiscriminate use 


resources has resulted in the deterioration 

of the physical, chemical and biological 

health of soil.  Appropriate soil management 

technologies to improve the soil health and to 



fertilizer application through distribution 

of FIHBs, b) emphasizing and encouraging 

organic farming, c) reclamation of saline and 
alkaline soils and d) correcting micro nutrient 


soil health, it is proposed to produce and 

distribute liquid bio-fertilizers which have 

advantages such as longer shelf life of 12 

to 14 months, free of contamination, higher 
microbial population, cost effective and easy 

to use  Referral Laboratories for Complete 
Soil AnalysisThe era of indiscriminate use of NPK is 
over and due to dwindling supply of organics to soil, the soil organic carbon, humus and 
microbial load have come down considerably 

and the soil has also lost the micronutrient 

replenishing capacity in locations where 
two crops in a year or crops like turmeric, 

tapioca, banana, sugarcane are cultivated. 

Hence, external application of micronutrients 
for every crop and every season has become 

compulsory. The foliar application is only 

supplementary while the soil requires 

regular application. The existing soil testing 

laboratories have the facility to analyze NPK, 

micronutrients, Electrical Conductivity (EC), 

pH etc.The proposed referral laboratory for 
complete soil analysis lends support to the 

farmer by providing micronutrient analytical 

information for better productivity of crops. 

The complete soil analysis includes the 

estimation of micro organism status of the 
soil. One such common facility for the state 

with capacity to handle 1000 samples a day 

shall serve the purpose. The approximate 

outlay proposed is   `5.00 crore.Efficiency in Use of Chemical 
FertilizersTamil Nadu is adopting a multipronged 
strategy to maintain soil health and fertility 
status of the soil by the balanced application 

of inorganic and organic fertilizers. Schemes 

such as balanced and integrated use of 

fertilizers, production and distribution of 

bio-fertilizers, procurement and distribution 

of green manure seeds, vermi-composting of 

farm waste, composting of farm wastes with 
Pleurotus are implemented.Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) was 





continue to increase their retail prices (RP) 

without prior notice frame, citing hike in the 
international prices of raw materials. For 

example, DAP (50kg bag) cost increased by 

187 percent over MRP (`990/-) in 2011 from 
`468.20/- in 2010. To reduce the burden of 

farmers, the Tamil Nadu Government has 
exempted 4 percent Value Added Tax (VAT) 


64present NBS system is detrimental to farmers, 
the GOI may intervene by revising (increasing) 
the subsidy. Liquid biofertilizer producing centres 
will be established to improve the shelf life of 

biofertilizers, at a cost of 
`2.75 crore through 
GOI assisted funds.Fertilizer2012-132013-142014-152015-162016-17
UreaDAP
MoP
Complex11.505.30
5.31
7.6112.005.56
5.57
7.9912.605.83
5.85
8.3913.236.12
6.14
8.8013.896.42
6.44
9.24Total29.7231.1232.6734.29
35.99 Source:  Dept. of Agriculture, GoTNTable 3.1.7:  Inorganic Fertilizer Demand Projection for the Twelfth Plan Effective Management of Pesticide 
ConsumptionThe successful adoption of Non-
Pesticidal Management (NPM) in several 
rainfed and irrigated cropping systems has 

led to change in policy and research. Tamil 

Nadu is particularly attentive to increased 

adoption of this productivity enhancing, 

cost-effective and eco-friendly production 

practices.The increased use of pesticides has 
disturbing consequences on the farming 

system, particularly, due to the development 

of resistance, resurgence of insect pests and 
decline in population of the natural enemies 

of pests.  Over-use of pesticides may lead 

to serious repercussion on environment 

and ecology. Hence, it is imperative to step 

up investment in research and technology, 

development of organic and bio-pesticides 

that are more effective in managing crops 
in an environmentally sustainable manner. 



with different crops to identify crop and 


a participatory research framework.Tamil Nadu is one of the pioneer 
states in successful adoption of IPM and 


awareness on the indiscriminate usage of 

chemical pesticides, b) Promote knowledge 

of local production of bio-pesticides, c). 



programmes and exchange programmes and 

d) Provide subsidies for technologies that are 

part of the IPM and NPM practices.Horticulture 
With an aim to achieve a growth rate of 9 percent to 10 percent in horticulture, 
more area will be brought under horticulture 



low income generating crops to high value 
horticulture crops. The overall production 

and productivity of the horticulture crops 

will be doubled during the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan period.  Horticultural Parks for fruits, 

vegetables and spices would be developed 

across the state.  More thrust will be given 

to micro irrigation with fertigation, precision 

farming, hi-density planting and organic 

cultivation by which large area will be 

covered under horticulture crops thereby the 

productivity per drop of water integrated crop 

management, post harvest management and 

market linkages and per unit area will be 

enhanced.6565Urban Organic Cultivation 
Increase in personal disposable income and awareness on food safety among urban dwellers have opened the gates for 
urban organic cultivation of vegetables.  The 
consumers are getting the information on 

harmfulness of pesticides on human health 

and their entry into food chain through 

effective media and internet. Kitchen 

gardening and terrace gardening are handy 

tools that could satisfy the vegetable needs 
of most of the nuclear families of the urban 

centres.  Besides the above, these gardens 

act as potential stress reducers.  Models of 
kitchen gardening and terrace gardening 

to suit the urban consumers are already 

available with TNAU and matching the 

requirements of consumers is the only need. 

Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it has 

been proposed to convert the awareness into 
actual kitchen and terrace garden models 

through capacity building programmes.  

The IEC funds available in the existing 
horticultural programmes will be utilized.   Popularising of Banana Cultivation 
Model of Theni in Intensive Banana 

Cultivation Tracts 
Box 3.1.5: Banana Growers 
Company, TheniBanana Growers Association with 
3,500 small farmers and a trader in a joint venture project in agriculture promoted a 
popular banana variety and cultivation 

has been undertaken in 20, 000 acres at 
Theni. Trader has established a ripening 
and a cold storage facility of 200 MT 

capacity at an investment of `20.00 crore. 

This has opened up the avenue of exporting 

to Dubai when they are competing with 

Maharashtra banana. The initiative of 

common ripening and storage facility has 

increased the prospects of Theni banana 

growers over the past 6 years.Source : Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN. The Banana Growers™ Association 
model conferred higher and stable income 
for the farmers and resulted in increased 

share in consumer™s rupee.  In Tamil Nadu, 

potential belts of banana cultivation are 

available at Thothukudi, Thirupathur taluk 

in Vellore district, Krishnagiri district (Elakki 

banana) and Alangudi taluk in Pudukottai 

district.  Farmers of the above tracts will be 

given exposure visits to Theni to emulate 

similar successful models in their locality.  

Also, capacity building programmes will 
be arranged for institutional building and 

technological upgradation.  In the Twelfth 

Five Year Plan, it has been proposed to form 

farmers™ federations in the above districts 

with active convergence of Department of 

Horticulture and Plantation Crops, TNAU 
and NGOs. Farmers™ Federations for Marketing 
of Flowers 

marketing models are functioning in Dindugul and Madurai districts for marketing 



unique Geographical Indication (GI).  Due to 

the initiatives of NGOs and TNAU, successful 



been evolved in Gobichettipalayam block 

of Erode district and this initiative needs 

institutionalization for further upscaling and 

sustenance.  Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan it has been proposed to give adequate 





tracts viz., Vellore (marigold) and Krishnagiri 

(chrysanthemum), Thiruvannamalai 

(tuberose).  Farmers™ federation will be 

formed and the farmers will be facilitated 

with group marketing to get higher price for 

their produce.New Initiatives in Horticultural 
Crops
crops by adopting all Hi-tech horticultural 
technologies, Model Horticulture Villages 

covering an extent of 40-100 ha. in 15 

districts is proposed.66
subsidy for construction of pandhals and distribution of hybrid vegetable seeds for 
promoting the pandhal vegetables viz., 

bittergourd, snake gourd and ribbed 
gourd.


demonstration unit in 0.4 ha. will 
be established in State Horticulture 

Farm, Kodaikanal. Excellence centres 


established.
an aim to create awareness among farmers 
on latest technologies in horticulture 

and to create export opportunities, an 
International Horti Fair will be organized 

in Chennai.
of planting materials of horticulture crops 
a new State Horticulture Farm will be 

established in an extent of 10 acres at 
Srirangam, Trichy district. 
horticulture parks in the State.
`10.18 crore in Dindigul district and ornamental 


district at a cost of `8.8 crore are proposed, 


using mobile based agro advisory system 
has been proposed.  Also, formation of 

Farmers Interest Groups and formation of 
Producers company has been proposed.
in Tamil) containing information on key 
production strategies for horticulture 
crops and other related information has 
been released. Agricultural EngineeringMechanisation in agriculture is still limited to usage of tractors and motor 

pumps. With availability of better paying 

service sector and construction jobs, 

increased migration from agriculture to other 
sectors is observed in Tamil Nadu during 
the last decade. To increase the productivity 

of the land and to cope up with shrinking 

agricultural manpower, mechanisation is 
not only essential but also imperative. The 

constraints in promotion of mechanisation 

include non standardized agricultural 
practices, small and marginal land holdings, 

low investment capacity of farmers, lack of 

know-how and non availability of service 

and maintenance facilities. Policy and 

structural mechanisms shall be developed to 

address these issues and support increased 

mechanisation in all phases of agriculture 

(Vision Tamil Nadu 2023).
approach is being adopted to promote farm 



heavy duty high value machinery will be 

purchased by the AED for custom hiring to 
farmers, b) at the second level, medium-sized 

agricultural machinery and equipments will 

be procured by PACCS for custom hiring 

to farmers. For this, the societies are being 
provided with a subsidy of 50 percent of the 

cost, not exceeding 
`20 lakh, to purchase a 

set of agricultural machinery, c) at the third 
level, farmers, SHGs and farmers groups 

will be assisted with subsidy to acquire 

agricultural machinery and equipment. Solar Energy Policy 2012 envisages 
judicious use of solar power and in line with 
the Policy, farmers will be motivated for Solar 

energization of irrigation pumpsets.  Provision 



one hand and it also reduces the burden on 

the State Grid on the other. 6767Establishment of Agro Service Unit 
in every PACCSIt is proposed to establish an agro 
service unit in every Primary Agricultural 
Cooperative Credit Society (PACCS) in the 

State for providing necessary agricultural 

machinery/implements to the farmers on hire 

basis. As the farmers do not have adequate 

knowledge to operate and maintain the 

agricultural machinery, it is also proposed to 

form farmers group in the jurisdiction of every 
PACCS to render necessary service support 

to the farmers in that area on various aspects 

of operation, repair and maintenance of 

various agricultural machinery/implements. 

This farmers group will also take part in the 

activities like raising of seedlings, custom 

hiring, supply of machinery and labour for 

various agricultural operations in that area. 

In Tamil Nadu, 4534 numbers of PACCS 

are functioning. It is proposed to continue 

the programme of providing agricultural 
machinery/implements to 3500 PACCS.
Mode Approach to increase the pace of 
agricultural mechanisation in the State and 



& water resources techniques for sustainable 

agriculture in rainfed areas. Crop varieties 
will be selected to suit the mechanization and 

facilitation for easy movement of machinery 

by adopting planned planting. Online Booking of Farm Machinery Presently, the farmer has to approach 
in person for booking the farm machinery in 
AED which drains time and money.  Hence, 
the Department of Agriculture has planned 

to provide an online booking system of farm 

machinery through the existing AGRISNET 

web portal.  With this system, the farmers 

can plan well ahead about the requirement of 

farm machinery and book it online through 

telephone and can make payment online 

through a payment gateway. This would help 

the farmers, to save time and money.SF and MF Friendly Machinery 
Average farm size in Tamil Nadu is 0.80 ha and it is declining year after year.  
The intensity of marginalization of holdings 

gets aggravated due to increase in population, 
subdivision and fragmentation.  On the 

other hand, increasing labour shortage in 

agriculture has resulted in dependence of 

machinery.  Owing to the size of holdings, the 
capacity utilization of the machinery is not 

achieved in most of the farms as the existing 
machinery are designed for larger farm size.  

Increased availability of machinery in villages 

has reduced the potential revenue generation 

through custom hiring.  In this context, usage 

of these machinery that are in vogue in small 
farms of Korea and Japan would be a viable 

alternative.  Small size of these machinery 

demand relatively lesser initial capital and 

can be utilized fully in the small holdings.  

Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year Plan it has 

been proposed to popularize these small 

and marginal farmer friendly machinery.  In 
addition to this, plant breeders should give 

emphasis on developing varieties which 

facilitate the use of these types of machinery.
Crop Insurance - National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme 

(NAIS)The State Government is making 

Insurance Schemes by introducing interim 
compensation to insured farmers, reducing 

the insurance unit area to revenue village level, 

uniform seasonality discipline, on account 

payment of claims for timely disbursement, 



to take risks in agriculture and protect them 
at the time of distress.The NAIS, since its inception has 
reached the pinnacle as of now in enrolling the 
farmers, area insured and premium subsidy.  

Initially, the farmers especially non-loanee 

farmers were reluctant to enroll under this 

scheme.  However, extension of 50 percent 

premium subsidy to both loanee and non-

loanee farmers brought higher percentage of 

farming community into the Crop Insurance 

Schemes. 68
for both loanee and non-loanee farmers.

and non-loanee farmers, as every time 
the State Government has to depend on 
Government of India for extension of cut-

off date as and when the cultivation of 

crops gets delayed either due to delayed 
release of water from major reservoirs or 

due to natural calamities. 
extended under Crop Insurance Scheme 
so as to bring all the farmers under 

insurance coverage. 
based on the Crop Cutting Experiments 

can be conducted for which State 

government shall be authorized to 
outsource manpower to conduct the 
experiments.
worked out by comparing average yield 
with threshold yield which normally 

deprives affected insured farmers of 
compensation. Hence, the government 

can compensate affected individual 
farmers on merit basis.
scheme is proposed to be implemented on 
pilot basis in selected blocks by removing 
the bottlenecks in the existing NAIS and 
for timely disbursement of compensation. Crop Insurance Œ Weather Based 
Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS)The critical stages of a crop such as 

stages are insured for weather parameters like 


humidity, consecutive dry days, wind speed, 

etc.  Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) have 

been established in 224 blocks and linked with 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University website 
to provide medium range weather forecast to 
carry out agriculture related activities by the 

farmers in time and also to provide weather 

data to the insurance companies. TNAU was 


based crop insurance products. Sensitization 

programmes were conducted to bring 
awareness about the products.Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme 
(CPIS)Coconut, a perennial crop which 
in Tamil Nadu in an extent of 4.00 L.ha. 

with a production of 55,471 lakh nuts and 
productivity of 13,852 nuts/ha. and there 

are better prospects to bring more area 

and increase the production besides value 

addition.  Coconut cultivation is largely 

affected by natural calamities.  In view of 

this, CPIS has been introduced on pilot basis 
in 11 districts with the objective to provide 

insurance coverage against natural and other 

perils, provide relief against income loss, 

minimize risks and encourage replanting.  

Healthy nut bearing coconut palms grown as 
mono or intercrop, on bunds or homestead 

and all varieties of coconut (Tall varieties of 

7 to 60 years and Dwarf and hybrids of 4 to 

60 years) are insured.  Individual farmers/
growers cultivating atleast 10 healthy nut 

bearing palms are eligible for enrolment.  The 

subsidy pattern is 50 percent by CDB, 25 

percent by State government and 25 percent 
by farmer.  6969Rural transformation
MGNREGSMany departments are implementing various schemes with an aim to uplift the 

economic status of rural population. If there 
is convergence among the departments, 

synergistic effect can be achieved resulting in 
holistic development of rural areas. Mahatma 

Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 

Scheme (MGNREGS) is implemented by 

Rural Development Department to generate 

employment opportunities in rural areas. 
The schemes implemented by Department of 

Agriculture can be integrated with MGNREGA 

so that the agricultural activities can be 

carried out in time by utilizing the available 

labour effectively.Role of Science and Technology in 
the Development of AgricultureTechnology is the prime mover of 
productivity and atleast one third of the future growth in productivity would come 

through innovations in crop technologies. 





technological practices. Technological 

breakthrough is an essential factor to 

increase the productivity and it is imperative 
that the obsolete practices adopted should be 
replaced with suitable interventions to double 

the productivity and to achieve the ultimate 
goal of food and nutritional security.The interventions should focus on 
developing suitable technologies for bridging 

the yield gap, development of drought and 





technology.Strengthening Extension for Effective 
Delivery 

inputs, best service, information, transfer 
of technology to farmers in time by 
integration of all sister departments. 
and NGOs in extension through technical 

training.
Agricultural Extension Management 

Institute to conduct training to the 
farmers, Farm Women Groups and FIGs.Strengthening of ATMA
Agency (ATMA) has to function as an 
independent agency with devolution of 

powers
link between the extension system 

and farmers at village level through 
bottom up approach, to promote group 
based approach, to involve farmers in 
planning and execution of schemes to 
suit their local needs, to encourage PPP 

and for recruitment of Farmer Friend to 

mobilize Farmer™s Groups and facilitate 

dissemination of information.
bottom up planning involving farmers and 
all the stakeholders.  


farmers, NGOs, commodity groups can 

be integrated with research scientists of 
TNAU and Extension functionaries of the 
Department of Agriculture.Uzhavar Peruvizha 
 ‚Uzhavar Peruvizha™ is a village 
level mass contact programme in Campaign 
Mode and it has been conducted for effective 

dissemination of information to help farmers 

to take rational decisions about various 

activities in agriculture and allied  sectors. 

This campaign was organized at the village 
level in all 16,564 revenue villages to enable 

the farmers to take on the challenges posed 
by today™s  agriculture and gear them up 

to be a part of Second Green Revolution in 
the State. This campaign was conducted 
70through ‚Mobile Extension Centre Approach™ 


agriculture and allied sectors and other 

stakeholders like input suppliers, bankers. 

All the stake holders spent one whole day 

with farmers to disseminate information 
and technologies. Integrated Farming 
System is being popularized during the 

mass contact programme. The information 

was disseminated through Street theatres, 
folk dance, songs, workshop with focus on 

the local farm problems and appropriate 

solutions. Various demonstrations, Mini 

Exhibition, discussion, Audio Visual shows, 

Mini cattle health camps were also conducted. 

Besides, farmers™ baseline data, soil testing, 

feed back on Government Farmers™ Integrated 

Handbooks and Farmers Guide Books were 

also distributed to the farmers. Based on the 
success of Uzhavar Peruvizha, it is proposed 

to conduct mass campaign every year to serve 
the farmers at their door steps.Gender - Empowerment of Women 
FarmersThe Government of Tamil Nadu has 
taken the following special initiatives in the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan to motivate women 



tune of 30 percent to 33 percent extended 

under various crop oriented schemes, 
 b) empowerment of farm women through 

capacity building on decision-making in the 

context of farm management, seed production 

and marketing, agricultural marketing with 
respect to post-harvest management, value 
addition of agricultural produce and market 
requirements/demand and c) Empowering 

farm women groups by distribution of gender 
friendly farm equipments, farm machinery 

for their use and hiring.  Farm women are 

motivated to form Farm Women groups and 



business and encourage farm women form 

commodity groups under ATMA. Box 3.1.6: Shift towards High 
Value CropsBurgur™s women farmers shifted to 
Rosemary cultivation when the  aromatic 

crop was introduced by MYRADA 
KVK, Erode district. Women Rosemary 

Association presently undertakes 

cultivation and marketing.  Technical 



distillation unit by district administration 

and poly-tunnel drying technology and 
structure provided by TNAU has helped 
the group™s income increase by 5 times.  

The association has negotiated a market 
tie up with leading companies. Source : Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN.Equity Issues- Small and Marginal 
FarmersThe following interventions have 
been made by the Government for involving 
the small and marginal farmers in the 


incentives over and above the Minimum 


Government for paddy and sugarcane.  7171
percent of the allocation under various crop oriented schemes to encourage small 


under these schemes and to motivate 
them to take up agriculture continuously.
marginal farmers to install drip irrigation 

units 
of crop loans.
State + 5 percent Central Government) to 

the small and marginal loanee farmers 
and 55 percent subsidy (50 percent State 
+ 5 percent Central Government) to small 

and marginal non-loanee farmers under 
Crop Insurance Scheme to motivate 

them to tackle the risks in agriculture by 
adopting progressive farm practices, usage 

of high value inputs, ultimately aiming on 
increasing the production.
small and marginal farmers for damaged 
crops in the event of natural calamities.  

At present `10,000/-per hectare is 
extended for paddy crop, `8,000/- and 
` 4,000/- for other irrigated and rainfed 

crops respectively.
general, preference will be given to small 

and marginal farmers.Innovative Schemes for Upliftment 
of Scheduled Caste / Scheduled 

Tribe FarmersThe proactive policy interventions of the Government of India and the State    
Government are to improve the socio-

economic status of the scheduled caste 

farmers for which the governments are 



oriented schemes in proportion to scheduled 

caste™s population in the State which now 
stands at 19 percent. In order to improve the 
economic status and to ensure transparency 
in implementing schemes exclusively for SC/

ST farmers, following schemes are proposed 

in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.Purchase of Wetlands for SC/ST 
FarmersWetlands are of major importance 
in agricultural systems and are becoming 
even more valuable components of agro-

ecosystems. The general understanding was 

that SCs do not own contiguous areas and 
that their holdings are scattered in the midst 

of land held by others. It may be observed 

that nearly two-thirds of the SCs and over 80 

percent of the STs are engaged in agricultural 
activities. On the other hand, only about 

53 percent of the ‚Others™ are involved in 
these activities. By and large, the SC & 

ST population depend on rain water and 
natural water resources for cultivating their 



existing irrigational facilities as available to 

other agricultural communities.  Under this 

backdrop, it is imperative to provide wetlands 

to SC/ST farmers as it will be one of the viable 

livelihood to uplift the economic status of the 

farmers.  The scheme may be implemented 

by the Revenue Department.Apart from the above, a separate 
provision of outlay in case of IFS, 
multiplication and distribution of seeds, 

distribution of inputs especially tractor and 

machinery, establishment of food processing 

units, cold storage units and coverage of 
crop/weather insurance scheme and other 

welfare schemes.           
72Table 3.1.8: Outcome and Measurable outputsSchemeOutcomeOutputPrecision FarmingProtected CultivationHi-Tech Productivity Enhancement 
ProgrammeModernization of State Horticulture FarmNational Mission on Micro IrrigationNational Horticulture Mission 
i) Hi Tech Nurseryii) Hi density Plantingiii) Canopy management/
Rejuvenationiv) Farm Mechanization60-80 percent increased yield


Produce
30 percent Premium Price
Extended Shelf life

Less labour dependence 
30-40percent water economy
Extended harvest ensuring  higher 
price
Technical, economical & social  
empowerment of farmers
Increased Productivity per unit  Area
High Quality Produce 
Sustainable income to farmers
Improved livelihood status of 
farmersLess labour dependenceHigh quality planting material
Drudgery alleviation
Reduced cost of production
High quality of Labour produce40- 50 percent water saving
Uniform crop growth.
Increase in yield
Less labour dependence
Uniform application of 
fertilizers through fertigationLess labour dependence High quality planting materialsIncreased Productivity per unit  Area
High Quality Produce 
Sustainable income to farmers
Improved livelihood status of 
farmersSenile orchards are made productive.
The cost is reduced by avoiding 
planting materials and other labour 
cost. Less labour dependence
yield 10 percent of vegetable area will be 
covered in a period of 10 years5 percent of total Mango & Cashew 
area will be covered under HDP in a 
period of 10 years.25 percent increase in production level of planting materials

30 percent increase in productivity 
levels of orchard crops.20 percent of Horticultural crop 
area will be covered in a period of 10 
years25 percent increase in production of planting materials
30 percent increase in productivity 
of orchard crops.10 percent of old and senile orchards  will be rejuvenated  and 
brought under high density5 percent  hort. farming will be 
mechanised in 10 years7373Reversing the Trend of Declining 
Agricultural GrowthThe Twelfth Five Year Plan has 
propounded the unique concept of Farm 
Level Planning which views the constraints in 
agriculture holistically and suggests practical 

solutions on individual farm unit basis and 

thereby contemplates to bring the desired 

increase in farm production.  Strengthening 

research and extension services to all 

farm families in Tamil Nadu-Farm level 

interventions for ﬁend-to-endﬂ involvement 
of extension staff with individual farmer has 

been planned. The Twelfth Five Year Plan 





(SRI) and SRI villages, improved pulses 

production technologies viz., System of Pulses 



Sustainable Sugarcane Initiatives (SSI) and 

Precision Farming to bridge the yield gap.  

Also, strategies are designed for improving 

agricultural marketing infrastructure and 

promoting farmers™ participation in agri-
business ventures. The Twelfth Five Year 

Plan has also framed strategies to increase 
the cultivable area and diversifying the 

cultivation in favour of high value horticulture 
and commercial crops while ensuring the food 

and nutritional security is ensured through 

the proposed Millet Mission. The requirement 
of agricultural inputs by the farmers will 
be assessed through ISMS by conducting 

meetings at village panchayat level and 

bottom up planning will be given priority 

so as to meet the local needs effectively 
and strategies are designed for ensuring 

the timely availability of adequate quantity 

of inputs. Apart from the above Integrated 

Farming System will be popularized so as to 

increase the farm income. Gender inclusive 

approach is given much focus and there 



equipments such as power weeders and 

markers. Adequate focus is bestowed on 

soil health improvement and reclamation 

of saline and alkaline soil, issue of Farmers 
Integrated Hand Book, promoting hi-tech 
agriculture, Precision Farming and Micro 



The Twelfth Five Year Plan includes strategies 

for need based human development through 

establishment of district poly-technics. The 

plan also proposes decentralized planning in 

the rural sector and linking it to the urban 

markets, and revitalizing the villages leading 

to the retention of the rural population in 
agriculture and allied sectors.  An amount of `7922.80 crore has been proposed in the Twelfth Five Year Plan 

and the details are given in the Table 3.1.9. Table 3.1.9: Twelfth Plan Outlay Œ Crop Husbandry Sector(` crore)S.No.Agriculture (Crop Husbandry)
Outlay12
3456Ongoing scheme
Procurement and Distribution of Paddy, millet and pulses seeds (including 
TSP/SCP).National Agricultural Development Programme (NADP)- including special 
programme for agricultural mechanization, Est. Agro Service UnitCrop insurance including WBCIS.

Oil seed production programme including ISOPOM and coconut development.National Horticultural Mission (NHM).
Horticulture Development-including Spl. Area development.287.051229.321200.92180.27
120.00217.9774 Table 3.1.9: Twelfth Plan Outlay Œ Crop Husbandry Sector (Contd.)(` crore)S.No.Agriculture (Crop Husbandry)Outlay78
9
10
111213
14
15
16
171819
20
21
22
23
24
252627
28National Mission on Micro Irrigation.
Production Incentives to farmers for supply of paddy.
Micro Nutrient mixture.

Others - ongoing
IAMWARM
Total Ongoing
New Schemes
Purchase of Wet land and distribution-SCP
Farm level planning



Sustainable sugarcane initiatives(SSI)
Soil Management Approaches- Soil Survey & Reclamation of Saline and alkaline soils and reclamation of fallow landsVillage Knowledge centres in all districts
Integrated Farming System Approach(including SC/ST farmers)
Formation and scaling up of Commodity groups

Crop Insurance Scheme @ 100 percent premium subsidy
Bio-fertiliser production units

Village level seed bank
Distribution of Tractor with trailer -SCP
Others-publicity, Training the youth on operation and maintenance of machineries, awareness creation, IIFS, dry land development
Seed production and distribution ( special programme)
Establishment of Community Radio Stations

Uzhavar Peruvizha
Total-New Schemes700.001000.00175.00
225.4849.825385.83200.00
338.37
425.2050.00250.00
261.0045.00137.5050.00150.0060.98111.0075.00
38.9280.0014.00250.002536.97 Grand Total7922.801  Is 
the 
current land use pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani Basin 
of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
   K. R. Karunakaran
 Associate Professor (Agricultural Economics)
 Tamil Nadu Rice Research Institute (TRRI)
 Aduth
urai, Tamil Nadu, India
 (Corresponding author:  krkaruna@gmail.com
)  S. Nedumaran
 Research Program 
Œ Markets, Institutions and Policies
 International Crop Research Insitute for the Semi
-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)
 Patancheru, Hyderabad, India
 (s.nedumaran@cgiar
.org)
   M. Chandrasekaran
 Professor 
(Agricultural Economics)
 Center for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies (CARDS)
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University
 Coimbatore, India
 (mcsekaran@gmail.com)
 1  Is 
the 
current land use pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani Basin 
of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
   K. R. Karunakaran
 Associate Professor (Agricultural Economics)
 Tamil Nadu Rice Research Institute (TRRI)
 Aduth
urai, Tamil Nadu, India
 (Corresponding author:  krkaruna@gmail.com
)  S. Nedumaran
 Research Program 
Œ Markets, Institutions and Policies
 International Crop Research Insitute for the Semi
-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)
 Patancheru, Hyderabad, India
 (s.nedumaran@cgiar
.org)
   M. Chandrasekaran
 Professor 
(Agricultural Economics)
 Center for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies (CARDS)
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University
 Coimbatore, India
 (mcsekaran@gmail.com)
 2  Is 
the 
current land use
 pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani 
Sub
-Basin of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
  Abstract
 Efficient and sustainable utilization of resources
, particularly land and water resource
s for agriculture 
have
 occupied the centre stage in the economic ag
enda of a nation. The regional resource availability
 and the 
 biotic, abiotic and socio
-economic constraints 
are 
largely 
varied in the any crop production system of 
that
 region. The integration of sustainable resource use with the production 
programs 
and i
ncome as objective
s of farming 
thus
, 
leads to a multiple objective
-planning framework. 
Attaining sustainable 
increase in 
agriculture production by considering the biophysical variability of the region without affecting the natural 
resources base is 
therefo
re 
very important to 
achieve
 food security for 
the growing population
 in a 
developing country situation
. The current study is to develop appropriate 
land use pattern in crop agriculture
 for sustainable land and water use to the agricultural 
development in the 
Bavani Basin
 of 
western zone of 
Tamil Nadu
 state 
in southern India
, 
using 
a multiple goal 
linear programming approach.
 Bhavani basin in the 
western zone of Tamil Nadu
 - one of the most diversified in bio physical feature
s, was evaluated 
in this study.
 The 
land use model 
 employed in the study following 
 the bio
-economic model by Shiferaw and Holden, 
(2003) 
who 
incorporated 
the 
important variations in the biophysical system (land and soils) and 
market characteristics. 
This study 
traced th
e alternative cropping pattern which 
would 
maximize
s the farm 
net income 
at a relatively lower water requirement, 
lower land requirement (
hectare days to ensure 
relatively more fallow period 
to lower land exhaustion rate) 
and that would lower the environme
nt damage 
in-terms of lower Environmental Impact Quotient (EIQ) 
with the given land and ground water availability of 
each identified ten homogen
eous land units
 beside the len
gth of growing period determined on the basis of 
quantum
 and distribution of rainf
all and temperature
.  The major biophysical factor
s considered 
beside
 the 
land availability, ground and surface water availability
 were;
 crop suitability for the particular soil type, crop 
sequence and climatic variations and these factors were specified a
s constrain
ts in the land use model. The 
input data for the model 
were collected from 
the 
sample respondents in the 
delineated homogen
eous land 
units. The actual water availability for each standard week (t) was estimated after adjusting the effective 

rainfall received during the period of crop stand from the total water requirement of each crop activity.  
 The land use model 
estimats 
reveal
ed the
 possibility of increasing the crop income fr
om 
the 
current level of 
INR
 6.14 billion to 
INR 
8.25 b
illion annually
. This alternative crop plan also helped to reduce the area under 
high water consuming crop
s in water deficit area
s.  3   INTRODUCTION
 Economic development and human welfare largely depend on optimum utilization of natural resources. 
There exist
s a wide spatial diversity in quantity and quality of land and water resources 
available 
and 
their 
efficiency in use for agricultural and non
-agricultural purposes. Efficiency and sustainability paradigms have 
therefore occupied the centre stage in the econ
omic agenda of a nation. A large proportion of India™s land 
shows clear evidence of advanced and continuous degradation, threatening to undermine the capacity to 

increase food production and alleviate rural poverty (Abrol, 1994). Despite the critical situa
tion, the increase 

in population led to decline the per capita availability of net sown area from 1.76 ha in 1950
-51 to 0.
11 ha
 in 
Tamil Nadu in India
 in 
2007
-200
8. On the other hand, the water availability for agriculture from both surface 
and ground wate
r sources 
was 
not able to meet the increasing demand by the changing cropping pattern and 
climatic variability. Annual internal renewable water resources in India fell by 652 cubic meter (cum)  per 

capita  in about 12 years i.e., from 1896 cum in 1988 to 1
244 cum in 2000 (HDR, 2000). The ground water 
estimation committee (1994) estimated the annual replenishable ground water potential to be 431 bcm and 

the ultimate irrigation potential in terms of area was estimated to be 80.38 mha. During the period from 
1984
-85 to 1998
-99, the number of dark
1 blocks (administrative unit consists of few villages) had increased 
from 253 to 428 at the national level. If this trend continues, the number of overexploited blocks would be 
doubled over a period of every twelve and
 half years (Swaminathan, 2002). In the State of Tamil Nadu the 
groundwater was over exploited in 54 bocks
 out of a total of 
385
-blocks
 which spread over in 16 districts 
(CWC, 2000). 
 
The integration of sustainable resource use with the production programs
 and income as objectives of 
farming thus, leads to a multiple objective
-planning framework. Attaining sustainable increase in agriculture 
production by considering the biophysical variability of the region without affecting the natural resources 

base is t
herefore very important to 
achieve
 food security for the growing population in a developing country 
situation. 
In 
such a 
situation
, there is an urgent need to identify concrete policy measures that would permit 
a simultaneous improvement of agricultural pr
oduction and conservation of natural resource base especially 

land and water resources. 
 Tamil Nadu 
state in 
southern 
India 
is divided into seven agro climatic zones based on rainfall distribution, 
irrigation pattern, soil characteristics, cropping pattern
, ecological and social characteristics. Among these 
seven zones, the Western zone consisting of Coimbatore and Erode districts 
covering Bhavani basin
 occupies 
12.03 per cent of the state
™s
 geographical area and 11.45 per cent of the state
™s
 net sown area.
 This zone 
accounts for 
close to 15 per cent of degraded land in the State. The western zone receives the lowest annual 

rainfall of 700 mm compared to the 959 mm for the State. Beside
s, well irrigation is 
the pre
domina
nt source 
of irrigation in this zone a
ccounting 
for 
about 53 per
 cent of total irrigated area. The depth of the water 
in 
this zone however, 
has fallen between 6 meters and 49.3 m
eters
 in the 
rainfall deficit years
 when the
 annual 
                                                 1 Dark block are were the groundwater extraction is more than recharge
 4  rainfall 
was 
around 450 mm. Due to poor maintenance and reductio
n 
in 
storage capacity of tanks, ponds and 
other small reservoirs 
also 
affect the groundwater recharge in th
is zone. The over extraction of groundwater 
and inefficient use of irrigation
 water
 for crops 
also 
leads to faster reduction in groundwater table. 
The current study therefore
 aims 
to answer the 
following 
question confronting the stakeholders in the region 
namely:
 1. What would be the optimal land allocation to different crop activities 
that will maximize the net 
farm income
 with the available 
land, 
water 
and environmental resources 
in 
the region?
  The overall objective of the study is to develop appropriate 
land use pattern in crop agriculture
 for 
sustainable land and water use to the agricultural development in the 
Bhavani basin of the 
west
ern zone of 
Tamil Nadu. 
 2. METHODOLOGY
 In India, private property right for land will leads to over exploitation of land, water other resources which 
causing spatial and temporal damages.  This study is indent to identify the land allocation pattern to th
e different crops and how the different resources or inputs like labour, water and credit are judiciously used to 

reach the maximum net return with the available production activities in the context of sustainability. In 
order to achieve the sustainability
 in land and water resources use, the spatial variability on bio
-physical 
characters must be considered. This would be achieved by 
identifying
 the homogeneous land which having 
same bio
-physical features of surface water availability, ground water status a
nd climatic feature like 
temperature, rainfall and Length of Growing period (LGP). 
 Land Use Model
 Land use studies dealing with the future prospects are generally of two types
 - predictive and explorative. 
The 
explorative land use studies focus more on de
fining the range of developmental possibilities at different 
scale (Van Ittersum 
et al
., 1998). These studies emphasized the biophysical possibilities, assuming that 
socioeconomic constraints could be managed in the long run (Van Keulen et al., 2000). Bio
-economic 
modeling (BEM) approach was used to analyze the combined effect of land degradation, population growth, 
market imperfections and increased risk of drought on household production, welfare and food security 
(Holden and Shiferaw, 2002). They used dy
namic non
-separable household model which maximized the 
household welfare. 
 The 
land use model
 employed in this study following 
the bio
-economic model by Shiferaw and Holden, 
(2003) 
which 
incorporated 
the 
important variations in the biophysical system (lan
d and soils) and market 
characteristics. 
Loborte et. al.(2009) dev
eloped and evaluated the methodology for exploring the lan
ds use 
option at s
ub national level to improve the scientific basis for lands use planning which 
provide
d the 
facilities 
for land ev
aluation for resource availability, scenario construction and land use optimization. 
Following the 
methodology t
his study
 would 
trace the alternative cropping pattern which maximizes the farm net income 
5  with the given land and ground water availability of
 each identified ten homogen
eous land units
 (HLUs)
.  The 
land and water availability of the each 
HLU
s were taken as constrain
ts. The actual crop water availability for 
each standard week (t) was estimated after adjusting the effective 
rainfall received during the period of crop 
stand from the total crop water requirement of each crop activity. 
 Input
-output coefficients
 The input
-output coefficients for the land use model were estimated from
 a sample
 of 
330 farm households  
spread in 22
 villages covering all identified 10 land units. 
The distribution of the sample households among 
the 10 
HLU
s is presented in Table 1. 
 Table 1 Distribution of Sample village in different land units
 Land Unit Classification
 Land units
 Geo area
 Selected villages
 ID Number
 area (ha)
 % share
 CBE
 Erode
 WZ Non ayacut critical average LGP
 0CA
 1 128370
 10.92
 1  1 Non ayacut over
-exploited average LGP
 0OA
 2 303836
 25.84
 2 3 5 Non ayacut 
Œsemi
-critical
- average LGP
 0RA
 3 182576
 15.53
  3 3 Non ayacut semi
-critical good LGP
 0RG
 4 32893
 2.80
  1 1 Non ayacut safe average LGP
 0SA
 5 46785
 3.98
  1 1 Ayacut critical average LGP
 1CA
 6 39362
 3.35
 1  1 Ayacut critical good LGP
 1CG
 7 36016
 3.06
 1  1 Ayacut over exploited average LGP
 1OA
 8 78946
 6.72
 2  2 Ayacut semi
-critical average LGP
 1RA
 9 280800
 23.88
 2 3 5 Ayacut safe average LGP
 1SA
 10 46061
 3.92
  2 2 Total  map area
 1175645
 (75.40)
 100
 9 13 22 Reserved Forest (RF)
 387625
 (24.60)
     Total Geographical area
 1563270
 (100)
      The land uni
t 0OA
- Non ayacut 
over exploited with average LGP less than 70 days of LGP without surface 
water facility is spread over 3.
03 lakh ha which constituted 
25.84 per cent of the total geographical area of 
the western zone (11,75, 645 ha which excluded 
the reserved forest area). This is followed by the land unit 
1RA
- Ayacut 
semi
-critical with average LGP with surface water facility which occupied about 2.80 lakh ha 
(23.88 per cent of total area).
 The field survey was conducted during 2006 and the farm da
ta were collected on recall basis for the normal 
year 
(2004
-05).  Primary data covering land use, cropping pattern, cultivation practices, irrigation, depth of 
water table in the tube and open wells, well output, human
 labour
, animal and machine 
power 
used
, 
chemical and other inputs used, crop outputs, input and output prices 
paid and 
received by farmers 
respectively 
and other household and farm details were collected from the selected sample farms through 
a well
-structured pre tested questionnaire. The inp
ut use and outputs 
obtained 
for different crop activities 
were varying for each 
of the 
HLUs
 and 
over seasons
. The inputs required for cropping activities such as 
fertilizer (N, P and K
 nutrients
), water, pesticides and other expenses 
on labour, bullock and 
 6   Figure 
1: Homogenous land units of Bhavani basin in Western zone of Tamil Nadu, southern India
 Note: The land 
units are designated with three character codes.  The first character 1 or 0 indicates ayacut (irrigated) 
and non
-ayacut (un
-irrigated); the second character O, C, R & S  refer to grounds water categories namely; over
-exploited, critical, semi
-critical and
 safe, respectively; the third character A or G represents Length of growing period
 with < 70 and >70 Days, respectively.
   7  machine power were considered.   From this 
data set, 
cost (operational cost) and returns were estimated for 
the crops
 raised in the 
identified 
HLUs
.  2.2 Static Land Use model
 The indices used in the land use model are given in Table 
2. Table 
2 Indices and Abbreviations used in defining Land Use Model
 Index
 types 
 Characters considered
 z Homogenous land units
 (HL
U)
 (10
 HLUs
) LGP, ground water, surface water 
availability and length of growing 
period 
used to delineate  HLU
s  t Time (52 standard weeks)
 Land and ground water availability for each HLU were estimated for 
each standard week. 
 c crops (26)
 19 irrigated 
crops (i)
 7 rainfed crops (r)
 Crop
s in the different 
HLUs
: The composition of different crops in 
vary spaciously
 depend
ing
 on the agro
-climatic suitability, 
marketing feasibility and technology availability for the region. 
However, 26 crop
s covering cereal
s (5), pulses (
1), oilseeds (3), 
fiber
(1)
, tuber (1), sugar crop (1), spices (2)
, fruits (1),
 vegetables 
(3) and narcotics were considered in the model.
 Cereals: Kuruvai and samba rice,  maize (
I & r)   finger millet  and 
grain 
sorghum (
i & r)
, 
fodder 
sorg
hum ( r)
 Pulses: Pulses (
 i & r) 
 Oilseeds: groundnut (
I & r), gingelly (i& r) and sunflower
 Fiber: Cotton (
I & r)
 Fruits: banana;                       Tuber: tapioca
 Sugar: sugarcane;                   Spices: turmeric and chilly
 Vegetables: onion, Brinj
al, tomato
 Narcotics: tobacco
 (Note: 
Trees :coconut and other tree cropped area excluded from 
the land availability
) Note: 
I - irrigated; r
- rainfed
 2.2.1 Objective Functions: Maximizing Net Income
 In this 
study a
 regional level explorative land allocatio
n model
 was
 developed 
which 
would 
maximize  net 
income from crop enterprise
s in the region. Income from each 
crop 
activity was the major factor that would 
determine the selection of crops. Thus, the objective function was maximization of net income from cr
op 
enterprise in the model. 
  Max  
,,x zczc
zccincNIvArc
    ,,,
zczczc
NIGIopC

 Where 
  cinc
      
: Crop enterprise net income
  ,zcvArc
: The level of crop activity ‚c™  in HLU ‚z™
  GI
z,c
         : Gross 
revenue from crop activity ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
  ,zcopC :  Operational cost for crop activity ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™ and
 8  ,zcNI : Net crop income per hectare from crop activity (difference between the gross revenue and 
operational
 expenditure of crop production). The operational cost per ha did not include the fixed costs and 
land rent.
 2.2.2 Constraints
 The net arable land availability (excluding area under coconut and other tree crops) and the availability of 
ground water were co
nsidered as constraints besides the fodder production in the model. The surface water 
feature was incorporated in the HLU classification through GIS technique.
 Agricultural Land Area:         
  , x ztzcz
ctacvArca
 Where
 ztac: The land area requirement for each crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™ at time period ‚t™. The land requirement was 
derived considering the crop suitability and sowing season conditional matrices derived from the 

discussion from the experts and secondary sources.
 ,zcvArc
: The level of crop activity ‚c™ in each HLU ‚z™ and
 za total land availability in each HLU ‚z™ after adjusting the area for perennial 
trees 
like coconut and 
other tree
s not included as crop activities.
 Water availa
bility constraint:
 ,,x ziczic
zt
ctwnnvArctw
 Where
 ,zcArc
: The level of crop activity
 ‚c™ 
in each HLU ‚z™
  ,zic
wnn
: The total actual water need for irrigated crop activity ‚ic™ in each HLU ‚z™. The water need was 
cal
culated considering the availability of weekly effective rainfall and ground water availability and 

recommended water requirement of each crop activity.
 tWzt          
:  zone wise water availability for standard week t
, considering both surface and groundw
ater 
availability for each HLUs for each standard weeks.
 Actual Crop Water Requirement
 The actual water needs for each crop was calculated considering the moisture availability through the 
effective rainfall during the stand of the particular crop. The equ
ation is given as
 ,zcc
zcwnnWreffRf

 where
 ,zcwnn
: Actual water required for each crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
 cWr : recommended water requirement for crop ‚c™ and
 9  zceffRf
 : Total soil moisture a
vailable through effective rainfall for zone‚z™ for crop ‚c™.
 Effective Rainfall
 The moisture availability through effective rainfall (
zteffRft
) for each HLU ‚z™ in time period ‚t™ was 
calculated by adding the daily rainfall in each HLU ‚
z™ (more than 2.5 mm and less than 50 mm per day). It 
was assumed that only 60 per cent of total rainfall reaches soil profile and the remaining 40 per cent drained 
out through runoff and seepage. Then, the crop wise moisture availability through effective
 rainfall was 
estimated by adding these for respective weeks of crop stand in that location. The equation is as follows:
 ,,,zc
zttceffRfeffRf
 Bio-physical Constraints: Soil Series and Crop Suitability
 Soil quality based crop suitability was incorpora
ted in each HLU, based on the soil characters as constraint. 
The crop suitability constraint is specified as follows:
 ,,,
 x  zczczc
ArcBpSuit
 where
 Arc
zc
   :decision variable; area to be allocated for crop ‚c™ in zone ‚z™
 BP
zc
  :Crop ‚c™ can be cultiva
ted in zone ‚z™ as 1 and 0 other wise; included as land suitability matrix
 Suit
zc
 :  total area suitable for crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
 2.3 Land and Water Resources Efficiency Analysis
 Cropping Intensity (CI)
 was calculated as the perc
entage of gross cropped area (GCA) to the total cultivable 
land area available for cultivation (LA).
  *100GCA
CILA  Based on Subbian et al. (1999) Cumulative Land Utilization Index (CLUI) 
was calculated by summing the 
products of land area pl
anted to each crop and the actual duration of that crop in weeks and dividing this by 
the total cultivable land area times weeks. 
 1*52
nii
iadCULI
LA*100
 where 
 CLUI
 - Cumulative land utilization index in per cent
  ai - area occupied by the i
th cro
p di -  weeks that i
th crop occupied
 n - total number of crops
 LA - total 
cultivatble 
land area available in a year 
 10  The CLUI 
would 
reach 
the 
maximum of 100 per cent when all 
the 
available land area was occupied by 
different
 crops throughout the year. 
Lesser CLUI with low level of water use that could generate maximum 
net income is preferred for 
land and water resources sustainability.
  Water Use Efficiency (WUE)
 is the ratio between the total net return realized from the irr
igated crop to total 
water used by the crop plan. 
  WUE
NIWU Where
  WUE
 - Water use efficiency rupees per thousand liter of water
 NI
 - Total net income realized from the irrigated crops in the optimal plan in 
INR
 WU
 - Total water used 
by the crop plan in thousand liters
 Considering the complexity of the present static land use model for 10 different 
HLU
s, the General Algebraic 
Modeling System (GAMS 22.9, 2009) was used for developing the land use model. The model con
sist
ed of 
260 (10x26) crop activities with 520 (10x 26 x 2) equations each for land and water resources, 260 (10x24) 
equations for crop suitability constraints. Thus, totally 260 activities and 1040 constraints besides the non
-zero equations were used in f
ormulating the land use model and solved 
using
 GAMS. 
 3. Results and Discussion
 The results and discussions 
included
; the 
descri
ption
 the land area availability, delineation of the 
homogenous land units
, followed by the model results
.   The 
Bhavani 
basin of 
western zone of Tamil Nadu was divided into 10 agro
-ecological 
HLU
s by overlaying the 
three spatial attributes 
namely;
 (i)
availability of surface irrigation, (command area map)
; (ii)
 ground water 
categorization based on the ext
raction 
levels of ground water; 
and 
(iii) 
the climatic feature (by developing 
the length of growing period 
- LGP) using GIS overlay technique and the same is presented in the map (Figure 
1). 
 3.1 
General 
Characteristics
 of the sample farms
 identified 
in th
e HLUs 
 The farm and famer™s 
general 
characters such as
; farm size, family size, main and secondary occupation, 
family labour availability for farm operation were analyzed fr
om the sample data collected for each 
of the 
HLUs.
 The average farm size was 0.72, 1.64 and 4.95 ha for marginal, small and medium to large size farm 
categories, respectively. The marginal and small farmers constituted about 59 per cent of the total number
 of 
sample operational holdings in the 
Bhvani basin of 
western zone 
in Tamil Nadu 
and they operated only 15 
per cent of the cultivable area. The average family size in different farm size groups ranged from 4.00 

(marginal farms) to 4.68 members per family 
(in large farms) in which children constituted 15.19 per cent of 

the family size. Male members engaged in agricultural operations constituted 73 per cent, whereas, two 
thirds of the females were engaged in the agricultural operations. 
 11  3.2 Operational Expe
nditure for Major Crops 
under Homogenous Land Units 
 The operational expenditure for cultivating major crops in the western zone was estimated from the sample 
farms 
(Table 3) 
to derive the net income per hectare realized from each crop in each 
of the HLUs
. The 
operational expenditure includes all the paid out cost on inputs except the fixed cost
. The results indicated 
that the operational cost was the highest for sugarcane (
INR
 59484 per ha.) followed by 
INR
 58385, 
INR
 51864, 
INR
 43893 and 
INR
 28528 per ha for banana, turmeric, tapioca and groundnut, respectively. The 
cultivation expenses of kharif paddy was 
INR
 19027 while for rabi paddy it was 
INR
17840 per ha. Among 
different homogenous land units, farmers incurred marginally higher operatio
nal expenses in ayacut land 
units
 (irrigated) 
such as; 1CA, 1OA, 1RA, 1SA and ICG for most of the crops; this may be due to higher use of 
inputs to achieve the targeted yield with the limited resources
. Table 
3 Operational Expenditure for cultivating diffe
rent crops under different land units
            (INR
/ha)
 Crop
 Non
 Ayacut Land units
 Ayacut Land units
 ALL
 CV %
  0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
   PADk
 17900
 18683
 18579
 19597
 17600
 18472
 18300
 2280
0 19560
 18248
 19002
 19582
 19027
 7.76
 PADr
 19248
 18579
 16579
 16579
 16579
 17513
 19001
 1600
2 1900
2 18579
 18248
 18166
 17840
 7.01
 RAG 6570
 6800
 5740
       6370
 6300
       5800
    6050
 6242
 7.47
 MAZ
 10400
 8400
 9490
 9620
 10300
 9642
 10900
 11100
 10960
 10650
 10200
 10762
 10202
 8.14
 PUL
 7420
 8940
 7680
 8400
    8110
 9400
 8670
 9420
 8720
 8470
 8936
 8569
 7.97
 GNT
 27694
 28577
 27274
 29274
 27274
 28019
 27373
 28311
 27229
 32694
 29577
 29037
 28527
 5.95
 GIN
 11200
 8400
 9490
 12590
 11300
 10596
 12000
    10900
 11100
 11400
 11350
 10931
 11.59
 COT
 24894
 28894
 28894
 25416
 25416
 26703
 25416
    31838
 31838
 31838
 30233
 28272
 10.82
 SCN
 62721
 61752
 62760
 63617
 63617
 62893
 62550
 57749
 51759
 56874
 51443
 56075
 59484
 8.01
 TUR
 57010
 54142
 62017
 51877
 48900
 54789
 49190
    53928
 41148
 48560
 48207
 51864
 11.42
 TOB
 18330
 13356
 19500
    17867
 17263
 18900
    19720
 18718
 19503
 19210
 18237
 11.36
 TAP
 40014
 40241
 44100
 43821
 37560
 41147
 44604
   48096
 48092
 48506
 47325
 43893
 9.03
 ONI
 25776
 24426
 22446
 25668
 23850
 24433
 20466
   22284
 20502
 21006
 21065
 22936
 9.12
 BAN
 53997
 49778
 58993
 60668
 60668
 56821
 58993
 59707
 60668
 59707
 60668
 59949
 58385
 6.21
 SFL
 13200
    12400
 13600
    13067
 14200
       11400
 12300
 12633
 12850
 7.87
 BRJ
 24370
 24370
 23900
 22590
 24500
 23946
 21500
 23600
 21700
 2320
0 21500
 22300
 23123
 5.28
 TOM
 17600
 16800
 16200
 15690
 17400
 16738
 16500
 15690
 14620
 13000
 16500
 15262
 16000
 8.54
 CHI
 23800
 24900
 22420
 21300
 22700
 23024
 24000
 23000
 22100
 25420
 21300
 23164
 23094
 6.13
 r_GN
 6590
 5175
 5687
 5144
 5125
 5544
 5233
 5061
 5175
 5687
 5144
 5260
 5402
 8.79
 r_GI
 4908
 4740
 4460
 4600
    4677
 4678
 4897
 4960
 3670
 3987
 4438
 4544
 9.75
 r_CO
 7830
 6530
 6520
    5900
 6695
       6590
 5860
 4984
 5811
 6316
 13.88
 r_MZ
 6700
 5800
 5060
 5902
    5866
 5830
 5740
 5120
 6200
 6300
 5838
 5850
 9.01
 r_fC
    3900
 2800 3400
    3367
       3800
 2750
    3275
 3330
 16.23
 r_CH
 4200
 3800
 4280
 4300
    4145
 4140
 4300
 4300
 4800
    4385
 4265
 6.43
 r_PL
 5621
 5556
 4956
 6090
 5402
 5525
 4981
 5291
 5417
 5290
 5920
 5380
 5452
 6.66
 Source: Estimated from farm sample
   12  3.3 Productivity of
 major Crops u
nder Homogenous Land Units 
 The productivity of major crops was estimated and the results would reveal that the average productivity of 
kharif paddy, rabi paddy, ragi and maize was 
52, 40, 30 and 29 qt
l/ha,
 respectively. The district average
 yield 
of these crops were 
33.11,
 29.06, 23.8 and 11.25 qtl per 
ha 
in Coimbatore district and 39.6, 41.65, 23.8 and 
22.8 qtl per ha f
or Erode district, respectively. The average yield of sugarcane (as main crop) was 108
0 qtl
/ha. 
While, the district average
 productivity of sugarcane was 87
0 and 102
0 qtl
/ha in Coimbatore and Erode 
districts
, respectively
. The variation in crop productivity among the land units was however less as revealed 
from the coefficient of variation with exception of 37 per cent of CV f
or rainfed maize
. 3.4 Net Income of Major Crops in Different Homogenous Land Unit Categories 
 The net income over the operational cost was estimated for the major crops in each 
of the HLUs 
and the 

result showed that turmeric recorded the maximum net income
 of 
INR 
71848 per ha over operational cost, 
followed by banana (
INR
. 70827) and sugarcane (
INR
. 46767). The low water consuming crops 
yielded net 
returns 
as follows
; cotton (
INR
. 13265), groundnut (
INR
. 44181), maize (
INR
. 10021) and onion (
INR
. 55762). 
In the ayacut land units (1CA, 1OA, 1RA, 1SA and ICG), the net return realized were comparatively higher at 
INR
 16679 vs 11296 for kharif paddy, 
INR
 8842 vs 
INR
. 6899 for rabi paddy, 
INR
 48433 vs 39928 for 
groundnut, 79050  vs 66086 for turmeric and 
INR
. 581
23 vs 35411 for sugarcane. The net income realized in 
each crop activity 
was considered in the land use model.
 3.5 Current Cropping Pattern in Different 
HLUs
  The alternative crop sets were optimize using the static land use model by using linear programmi
ng 
(LP) approach for each homogeneous land units with given land and water resource availability. In the land 

availability constraints 1.92 
lakh
 ha was excluded which covers area under Tamarind, Guava, Mango, 
Coconut, Tea and Coffee. Similarly, the net gro
und water availability was estimated with the average pump 
output, well output in liter per second in each homogeneous land units for 52 standard weeks. 
The current 

cropping pattern revealed,
 after excluding area under perennial crops
/trees
, 17 major crops
 were cultivated 
in different 
HLUs
 of about 4.45 lakh ha in 2004
-05. In order to understand the current status of the present 
cropping pattern, various efficiency indicators such as cropping intensity, cumulative land utilization index, 
share of the high a
nd low water consuming crops, commercial crops, rainfed crops and area under vegetable
 crops
 were 
aggregated 
for each 
HLU
 and the results are presented in Table 
4. The analysis presented in 
Table 
4 would show that
 paddy was cultivated 
in 
little
 over 
58,000
 ha followed by 
maize and sugarcane 
with
 30281
 ha
 and 25831 ha, respectively under irrigated condition. Groundnut, 
sorghum, pulses and fodder sorghum were the major rainfed crops 
that 
constituted 43
-57 per cent of 
cropped area. Groundnut cover
ed 47530 ha, 
next to sorghum
 with 91500 ha
. The fodder sorghum occupied 
52300 
ha. The cropping intensity was relatively high in 1OA, 1CA followed by 1CG under ayacut land units 
(133, 120 and 119 per cent
, respectively) 
whereas;
 it was 123, 128 and 105 under Non
-Ayacut (0RG, 0CA, 
0RA) land units. However cumulative land utilization index was relatively less in irrigated land units 
at 
38 per 
13  cent compared to 46 per cent in Non
-ayacut units. It 
would also be surprising
 to note that the area under 
high water consumi
ng crop
s (paddy, banana, turmeric
, tobacco 
and sugarcane) constituted almost 65 per 
cent of the area in non
-ayacut land units but it was around 31 per cent in ayacut land units. This need
ed 
 to 
be 
watched 
in terms
 of changes 
in the alternative crop set
 as we aim at a sustainable cropping pattern in this 
analysis
. Rainfed crops normally dominated in non ayacut land units. 
 Table 
4 Distribution of crops under current cropping pattern in ha*
 Crops
 Non Ayacut area
 land unit
 Ayacut area
 land units
 WZ 0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All 
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
 PADk
 2076
 3977
 1504
 181
 553
 8291
 183
  185
 4004
 424
 4796
 13087
 PADr
 12738
 9142
 8080
 665
 1242
 31867
 2655
 468
 1024
 8685
 290
 13122
 44989
 RAG
 15 18 84   117
 5   70  75 191
 MAZ
 1757
 2130
 5589
 44 146
 9666
 6553
 434
8 1005
 7668
 1042
 20616
 30281
 PUL
 236
 785
 351
 37  1409
 58  168
 336
 139
 701
 2110
 GNT
 899
 2357
 3679
 189
 348
 7472
 369
 685
 1345
 5207
 1198
 8804
 16276
 GIN
 2552
 5107
 1605
 98 793
 10155
   183
 2653
 1288
 4124
 14280
 COT
 143
 1454
 1142
 56 297
 3092
 4  249
 1937
 1329
 3519 6610
 SCN
 4128
 4763
 7636
 260
 789
 17576
 715
 1238
 194
 5733
 375
 8255
 25831
 TUR
 2369
 3664
 1692
 71 264
 8060
 114
  128
 1449
 96 1787
 9847
 TOB
 1564
 206
 794
  454
 3018
   9 459
 112
 580
 3599
 TAP
 280
 1379
 600
  273
 2532
   44 825
 287
 1156
 3687
 ONI
 306
 1043
 625
 6 23 2003
 433
  119
 621
 38 1211
 3212
 BAN
 3787
 4413
 1208
 31 1212
 10651
 231
 30 119
 1054
 151
 1585
 12236
 SFL 170
  580
 37  787
 45   1043
 34 1122
 1909
 BRJ
 75 389
 132
 7 1 604
 16 55 22 127
 54 274
 878
 TOM
 237
 1328
 220
 8 2 1795
 85 119
 607
 352
 114
 1277
 3072
 CHI
 254
 447 331
 18 73 1123
 120
 31 174
 364
 5 694
 1817
 r_GN
 8408
 8703
 10861
 800
 3766
 32538
 6  3261
 11607
 118
 14992
 47530
 r_GI
 38 1826
 705
   2569
 19 155
 276
 973
  1423
 3991
 r_CO
 618
 7019
 44   7681
 213
  1790
 555
  2558
 10239
 r_MZ
 692
 1267
 3277
 13  5249
 160
 398
 1269
 3088
  4915
 10164
 r_FC
 10484
 13627
 14068
   38179
   701
 13422
  14123
 52302
 r_CH
 12043
 40524
 8289
 206
  61062
 1955
 2536
 10831
 15132
  30454
 91515
 r_PL
 4074
 10724
 1635
 115
 48 16596
 4171
 4589
 6020
 3937
 85 18802
 35398
 GCA 69940 126292 74731 2841 10284 284088
 18110 14651 29723 91302 7179 160965
 445051 NSA
 54710 120288 71366 2311 24774 273449
 15036 12280 22310 94147 14953 158726
 432175 CI
 127.84
 104.99
 104.72
 122.92
 41.51
 103.89
 120.44
 119.31
 133.22
 96.98
 48.01
 101.41
 102.98
 CLUI
 59.08
 44.44
 47.81
 55.98
 21.79
 45.82
 44.02
 42.20
 45.85
 40.99
 21.27
 38.87
 44.06
 LWC
 25.27
 39.06
 43.88
 29.31
 37.26
 34.956
 66.35
 75.10
 70.42
 50.87
 80.84
 68.72
 45.34
 HWC
 74.73
 60.94
 56.12
 70.69
 62.74
 65.044
 33.65
 24.90
 29.58
 49.13
 19.16
 31.28
 54.66
 COM
 55.42
 48.40
 73.31
 57.63
 82.08
 63.368
 50.15
 48.18
 38.67
 64.77
 86.93
 57.74
 57.92
 ir_Sh
 48.02
 33.73
 47.97
 60.10
 62.91
 50.546
 63.98
 47.60
 18.76
 46.65
 97.18
 54.83
 43.57
 r_Sh
 51.98
 66.27
 52.03
 39.90
 37.09
 49.454
 36.02
 52.40
 81.24
 53.35
 2.82
 45.17
 56.43
 veg_Sh
 1.25
 2.54
 1.75
 1.36
 0.95
 1.57
 3.61
 1.40
 3.10
 1.60
 2.95
 2.532
 2.02
 Irrigated crops:  
PADk: Kharif paddy; PADr:Rabi Paddy; RAG:Rafi; MAZ:Maize; PUL:Pulses; GNT:Groundnut; GIN:Gingelly; 
COT:Cotton; SCN:Sugarcane; TUR:Turmeric; TOB:Tobaco; TAP:Tabioca; ONI:Onion; BAN:banana;SFL:Sunflower; 
BRJ:
brinjal; TOM:Tomato;  CHI:Chillies; 
 Rainfed crops
: r_GN:groundnut; r_GI:gingelly; r_CO:Cotton; r_MZ:Maize;  r_FC:fodder cholam; r_CH:cholam; r_PL:pulses
 14  Efficiency indicators
: CI: Cropping intensity; CLUI: Cumulative land utilization index; LWC: Low water
 consuming crops; 
HWC: High water consuming crop
 (Paddy, 
Sugarcane, Turmeric, Tobaco and Banana)
s; COM: Commercial crops; Ir_Sh: 
share of irrigated crops; r_Sh: Share of rainfed crops; veg_Sh: share of vegetables.
 (indicate what are HWC and LWC crops, 
also
 add 2 columns 
- total for non
-ayacut and total for ayacut
-also give %)
 The 
analysis of
 HLU
 wise cropping pattern clearly 
revealed the fact 
that the current cropping pattern is 
ground water exploit
ative in
 nature
, particularly 
in ground water deficit 
HLUs 
(0CA, 0OA, 1CA,1CG, 1OA)
, 
more specifically in the non
-ayacut areas where the high water consuming crops dominated and alternately 
in the ayacut areas
 with higher cropping intensity ranging f
rom 110 to 133 per cent
. This warrant
s optimizing 
the current cro
pping plan for simultaneous increase in net income 
while reducing
 the pressure on ground 
water use.
 3.6. 
Optimal (
Alternative
) Cropping Pattern
 The alternative crops set 
was identified using the static land use model and the same presented in Table 
5. The
 percentage change in area and income over the current plan for each crop activity w
as estimated and 
presented in Table 
6.  Table 
5. Optimal (
Alternative
) cropping pattern in Western zone in ha
       Crops
 Non ayacut land units
 Ayacut land units
 WZ 0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
 PADk
 3039
 6683
 3965
 128 1376
 15191
 835 682 1239
 5230
 831 8817
 24010
 PADr
 2188
 4812
 2855
 92 991 10938
 601 491 892 3766
 598 6348
 17287
 RAG
 3647
 8019
 4758   16424
 1002
   6276
  7278
 23703
 MAZ
 3218
 7076
 4198
 231 1304
 16027
 884 1228
 2231
 5538
 1495
 11376
 27404
 PUL
 5471
 12029
 7137
 122  24759
 1504
 646 1174
 9415
 787 13526
 38284
 GNT
 2879
 6331
 3756
 122 1077
 14165
 791 251 1174
 4955
 787 7958
 22124
 GIN
 2879
 6331
 3756
 100 506 13572
   970 4955
 650 6575
 20148
 COT
 2379
 5230
 3103
 47 563 11322
 654  455 4093
 305 5507
 16829
 SCN
 1117
 2455
 1456
 53 1304
 6385
 307 614 507 1921
 340 3689
 10073
 TUR
 1243
 2734
 1622
 51 551 6201
 342  1174
 2140
 787 4443
 10644
 TOB
 2879
 6331
 3756
  991 13957
   496 4955
 332 5783
 19741
 TA
P 1216
 2673
 1586
  476 5951
   892 2092
 598 3582
 9534
 ONI 2188
 4812
 2855
 122 1304
 11281
 601  429 3766
 288 5084
 16364
 BAN
 1052
 2313
 1372
 122 1239
 6098
 289  1174
 1811
 787 4061
 10159
 SFL 2879
  3756
 116  6751
 791   4955
 787 6533
 13285
 BRJ 2879
 6014
 3756
 116 1304
 14069
 791  1116
 4955
 748 7610
 21679
 TOM
 2735
 6014
 3568
 122  12439
 752  1174
 4707
 748 7381
 19821
 CHI
 2735
 6331
 3568
 128  12762
 752  1239
 4707
 787 7485
 20249
 r_GN
 2879
 6683
 3756
   13318
 791   4955
 831 6577
 19895
 r_GI
 3039
  3965
   7004
 835   5230
  6065
 13070
 r_CO
 2735
 6014
 3568
  1239
 13556
   1116
 4707
 748 6571
 20127
 r_MZ
 2879
 6331
 3756
 122  13088
 791 646 1174
 4955
 787 8353
 21442
 r_FC
  6331
 3756
   10087
   1174
 4955
  6129
 16216
 r_CH
 5471
 6331
 3756
 231  15789
   1174
 4955
  6129
 21918
 r_PL
  12029
 7137
   19166
   2231
 9415
  11646
 30811
 GCA
 63633
 139905
 90517
 2024
 14224
 310303
 13316
 4559
 23208
 119412
 14020
 174515
 484817
 NSA
 54710
 120288
 71366
 2311
 24774
 273449
 15036
 12280
 22310
 94147
 14953
 158726
 432175
 CI 116.31
 116.31
 126.84
 87.57
 57.41
 113.5
 88.56
 37.12
 104.02
 126.84
 93.76
 109.9
 115 CLUI
 46.44
 44.85
 48.56
 38.28
 30.25
 41.7 35.10
 15.51
 45.74
 48.56
 43.68
 37.7
 43.95
 15  LWC
 81.47
 80.25
 81.47
 73.29
 57.95
 74.9
 78.21
 54.31
 69.47
 81.47
 71.32
 71.0
 79.39
 HWC
 18.53
 19.75
 18.53
 26.71
 42.05
 25.1
 21.79
 45.69
 30.53
 18.53
 28.68
 29.0
 20.61
 COM
 68.86
 64.33
 67.29
 71.66
 83.36
 71.1
 70.39
 60.08
 71.08
 67.29
 84.20
 70.6
 65.95
 ir_Sh
 73.28
 68.75
 67.20
 82.57
 91.29
 76.6
 81.84
 85.82
 70.40
 67.20
 83.13
 77.7
 66.21
 r_Sh
 26.72
 31.25
 32.80
 17.43
 8.71
 23.4
 18.16
 14.18
 29.60
 32.80
 16.87
 22.3
 33.79
 veg_Sh
 16.56
 16.56
 15.19
 24.07
 18.33
 18.1
 21.75
 0.00
 17.06
 15.19
 18.33
 14.5
 13.30
 CI: Cr
opping intensity; CLUI: Cumulative land utilization index; LWC: Low water consuming crops; HWC: High 
water consuming crops; COM: Commercial crops; Ir_Sh: share of irrigated crops; r_Sh: Share of rainfed crops; 
veg_Sh: share of vegetables.
  Results presente
d in table 
5 table 
6 would show 
that the gross cropped area  increased 
by 
nine per cent over 
current plan and generated the net income of 
INR
 8.25 billion 
in the alternate plan 
compared to 
INR
 6.14 
billion under current plan
.  Area under l
ow water co
nsuming crops such as ragi, brinjal, irrigated pulses  and 
chillies increased more than 10 times while area under 
high water consuming crops like; 
rabi season paddy, 
sugarcane and banana ha
d reduced 
by 
more than 50 per cent over current plan
. The increase 
in net income
  over current crop plan 
was by 34 per cent.
  Table 
6. Changes in alternative plan over current cropping pattern and in Western Zone
 Crops
 Current cropping plan
 Alternative crop plan
 % increase over 
current plan
 Area
 income
 Area
 income
 Area
  income
 ha % L INR
 %  ha % L INR
 %  PADk
 13087
 2.94
 164
 2.67
 24010
 4.95
 304
 3.68
 83.46
 85.57
 PADr
 44989
 10.11
 506
 8.25
 17287
 3.57
 205
 2.49
 -61.58
 -59.44
 RAG
 191
 0.04
 2 0.04
 23703
 4.89
 274
 3.32
 12324
 11050
 MAZ
 30281
 6.80
 378
 6.15
 27404
 5.65
 345
 4.18
 -9.50
 -8.70
 PUL
 2110
 0.47
 42 0.68
 38284
 7.90
 800
 9.69
 1714.32
 1819.21
 GNT
 16276
 3.66
 699
 11.39
 22124
 4.56
 955
 11.57
 35.93
 36.61
 GIN
 14280
 3.21
 305
 4.97
 20148
 4.16
 476
 5.77
 41.09
 56.17
 COT
 6610
 1.49
 118
 1.92
 16829
 3.47
 291
 3.53
 154.60
 146.97
 SCN
 25831
 5.80
 1158
 18.86
 10073
 2.08
 407
 4.93
 -61.00
 -64.86
 TUR
 9847
 2.21
 482
 7.85
 10644
 2.20
 493
 5.97
 8.09
 2.33
 TOB
 3599
 0.81
 23 0.38
 19741
 4.07
 181
 2.19
 448.55
 671.02
 TAP
 3687
 0.83
 37 0.61
 9534
 1.97
 81 0.98
 158.57
 117.51
 ONI
 3212
 0.72
 79 1.29
 16364
 3.38
 417 5.06
 409.40
 428.92
 BAN
 12236
 2.75
 604
 9.84
 10159
 2.10
 396
 4.80
 -16.97
 -34.45
 SFL 1909
 0.43
 37 0.60
 13285
 2.74
 234
 2.84
 595.94
 538.08
 BRJ
 878
 0.20
 25 0.41
 21679
 4.47
 652
 7.90
 2369.14
 2468.18
 TOM
 3072
 0.69
 70 1.15
 19821
 4.09
 474
 5.75
 545.21
 574.86
 CH
I 1817
 0.41
 0 0.00
 20249
 4.18
 7 0.09
 1014.40
 3203.59
 r_GN
 47530
 10.68
 634
 10.33
 19895
 4.10
 297
 3.60
 -58.14
 -53.10
 r_GI
 3991
 0.90
 37 0.61
 13070
 2.70
 191
 2.31
 227.50
 411.84
 r_CO
 10239
 2.30
 93 1.52
 20127
 4.15
 225
 2.73
 96.57
 141.37
 r_MZ
 10164
 2.28
 45 0.73
 21442
 4.42
 100
 1.22
 110.96
 122.94
 r_FC
 52302
 11.75
 58 0.94
 16216
 3.34
 20 0.24
 -68.99
 -65.14
 r_CH
 91515
 20.56
 225
 3.67
 21918
 4.52
 47 0.57
 -76.05
 -79.27
 r_PL
 35398
 7.95
 317
 5.16
 30811
 6.36
 378
 4.58
 -12.96
 19.37
 GCA
 445051
 100
 6139
 100
 484817
 100
 8251
 100
.00
 8.93
 34.41
 NSA
 432175
    432175
       16  It could
 also
 be 
seen that
 the 
area under 
rabi season paddy 
decreased by about 62 per cent 
while 
a 83 per 
cent increase 
was noticed 
in kharif season paddy over current plan but
 overall
, the 
total 
paddy area has 
reduced from 0.58 
lakh
 ha to 0.42  
lakh 
ha. 
The paddy area rather evened out between the kharif and rabi 
seasons. The decline was more pronounced in the non
-ayacut HLUs, particularly in the greater ground water 
deficit ones. 
Among the other HWC crops, area
 under sugarcane and banana declined by 6
1.00 and 
16.97
 per 
cent respectively, while that of turmeric increased marginally by 
8.09
 per cent
 which 
may be due to higher 
net benefits
. Among the low 
water consuming crops, there was a marginal reduction in area under maize by 
9.50
 per cent, 
whereas
 area under crops like, groundnut, gingelly, cotton
 and tapioca increased considerably 
ranging from
 35.93 per cent to 154.60 per cent. In the case of ragi, tobacco, onion, sunflower
 and vegetables 
namely, 
brinjal, chilies and tomato, the increase was substan
tial ranging from 409.40 to 2369.14 per cent.
 Under rain fed conditions
, area under groundnut, 
grain sorghum, fodder sorghum,
 and pulses declined in the 
range of 12.96 to 76.05 per cent, whereas, area under gingelly, cotton and maize increased between 96.5
7 and 110.96 per cent. 
The inference is shift from high water consuming and rain fed crops to low water 
consuming and commercial crops including vegetables. 
A comparison of table 3 and table 4 would also show 
that the cropping intensity declined in the cri
tical, semi critical and over exploited HLUs
, whereas it increased 
in the safe HLUs. The CLUI also shown a decline in the critical and over exploited HLUs in terms of ground 
water, while overall it showed a marginal increase. All these are sign of a crop s
et that will sustain resource 
base and simultaneously help to increase the farm income substantially. 
 4 Conclusion and policy implication 
 The static land use model was developed with an intension to identify an alternative cropping plan which 

would take 
care of the land and water resource use sustainability besides maximizing net income from crop 

enterprise in 
the 
Bavani basin of the 
western zone of Tamil Nadu
 in southern India
. The land use model use
d the spatial variation in biophysical and socio
-economic variables of a region by incorporating spatial 
attributes of land and water resources. The major biophysical factor considered are the land availability, 
ground and surface water availability, crop suitability for the particular soil type, crop se
quence and climatic 
variations 
in terms of the length of growing period, 
and these factors were specified as the constrain
ts in the 
land use model. The input data for the model 
were collected from 
the delineated 
HLUs
. The 
optimum 
land 
use model reveals tha
t there is possibility of increasing the crop income 
in the upper Bhavani basin of 
western zone of Tamil Nadu 
form current level of 
INR
 6.14 billion to 
INR
 8.25 b
illion
. This alternative crop 
plan also helped to reduce the area under high water consumi
ng crop
s in water deficit area 
without
 affecting 
the land and water resources base.
 Thus
, it could be revealed from the land and water resource efficiency 
indicator
s for the alternative crop plan
, 
resulted
 sustai
nable resource use with higher net income
, 
achie
ved 
through
 the static bio
-economic model.
   17  Reference
 Abrol, I.P. Land Degradation
-A Challenge to Sustainability, In Salinity Management for Sustainable Agriculture 
(Eds) D.L.N. Rao, N.T. Singh, Raj K. Gupta and N.
T. Tyagi, (Karnal : Central Soil Salinity Research 
Institute, 1994)
 Central Water Commissions, 
Water and Related Statistics,
 New Delhi, 
2000.
 GAMS Development Corporation, 1998
 Washington, DC, 2000
7, USA Email. Sales@ games:
 http//www
/gams.com
 Holden, Stein., Hans Lofgren and Bekele Shiferaw ﬁEconomic Policy Reforms and Soil Degradation: A Village 
CGE Mode
l for a high Agricultural potential area with good market access in the Ethiopian Highland, 
2002.
 Human Development Report 2000, p.38. 
 Ittersum, M. K., Van R. Rabbinge and H.C.Van Latesteijn, ﬁExploratory Land Use Studies and their Role in 
Strategic Polic
y Makingﬂ, Agricultural System, 58:309
-330, 1998.
 Keulen, H.Van, M.K.Van Ittersum and N. De Ridder, ﬁNew approaches to land Use Planningﬂ in Eds 
R.P.Roeter, H.Van Keulen, A.G.Laborte, C.T.Hoanh and H.H. Van Laar, ﬁ System Research for 
Optimizing Future Lan
d Use in South and South
-East Asiaﬂ, SysNet Research Paper |Series No. 2, 
International Rice Research Institute, Los Boños, Philippines , 2000, pp: 3
-20. Subbian, P, K. Annadurai and S. P. Palaniappan. 
Agriculture 
- Facts and Figures
 (Luthiyana : Kalyani 
Publishers, 2000) pp 78
-81.
 Shiferaw Bekele and Stein T.Holden, ﬁFarm Level Benefits to Investments for Mitigating Land Degradation: 
Empirical Evidence from Ethiopiaﬂ, Environment and Development Economics, 6:335
-358, 2003
 Swaminathan, M.S., ﬁ
Agriculture an
d Allied Sectors
ﬂ Report of the Steering Group on for the Tenth Five Year 
Plan 2002
-2007, Tenth Five Year Plan / Steering Group Sr.No.13, 2002, p.14
  [![Return to
frontpage](http://www.thehindu.com/template/1-0-1/gfx/logo.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/)

[](https://twitter.com/The_Hindu)

[](https://plus.google.com/+thehindu)

[](https://www.facebook.com/thehindu)

[](https://instagram.com/the_hindu/?ref=badge)

[](https://www.youtube.com/user/The1878Hindu)

[](http://www.thehindugroup.in/subscribe/)

[](http://www.thehindu.com/apps/)

  * [Home](http://www.thehindu.com/ "Home, Popular, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Delhi, Mumbai, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Environment, Cinema, thREAD, Metroplus, Specials" )
    * [![A scene in Mayurimarg Hyderabad showing many vehicles partially submerged under flood waters. Photo: K.V.S. Giri](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Hyd_rains_3017628i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-throws-life-out-of-gear-in-hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Incessant rain throws life out of gear in
Hyderabad](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-
throws-life-out-of-gear-in-
hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, Minister for Irrigation M.B. Patil
and Minister for Home G. Parameshwara heading for a meeting to discuss Carvery
issue at Vidhana Soudha . Photo: V. Sreenivasa
Murthy](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/CM_3017744i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-issue-bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BJP to boycott all-party meet convened by
Siddaramaiah](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-issue-
bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka vehicles are not being allowed beyond Attibele check post. Photo:
K.C.
Deepika](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/Attibele_3016667i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-row-sc-directs-karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Cauvery Row: SC directs Karnataka to release 6,000 cusecs a day to Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-row-sc-directs-
karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Chennai   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/chennai/) [Hyderabad
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/) [Bengaluru
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/) [Delhi
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/) [Mumbai
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Andhra Pradesh
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/) [Environment
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/) [Cinema
|](http://www.thehindu.com/features/cinema/) [thREAD
|](http://www.thehindu.com/thread/) [Metroplus
|](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/) [Specials
](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/)

[Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" )

  * All Sections
    * News

[News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/)
[National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/)
[International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/) [Andhra
Pradesh](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/)
[Kerala](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/)
[Telangana](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other
states](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)
[Cities](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/)

Business

[Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/) [Agri-
Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/agri-business/)
[Economy](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/)
[Industry](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/)
[Markets](http://www.thehindu.com/business/markets/)

OP-ED

[Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/)
[Columns](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/)
[Editorial](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/)
[Interview](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/interview/) [Readers'
Editor](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/)

Resources

[Resources](http://www.thehindu.com/news/resources/) [The India
Cables](http://www.thehindu.com/news/the-india-cables/)
[Elections](http://www.thehindu.com/elections/)
[Topics](http://www.thehindu.com/topics/)

Events

[Lit for Life](http://www.thehindu.com/features/lit-for-life/) [November
Fest](http://www.thehindu.com/features/november-fest/)

Life & Style

[Entertainment](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/)
[Art](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-art/)
[Cinema](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-cinema/)
[Dance](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-dance/) [History &
Culture](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-history/)
[Music](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-music/)
[Theatre](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-theatre/)
[Motoring](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/Motoring/)
[Travel](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/travel/)
[Books](http://www.thehindu.com/books/) [Literary
Review](http://www.thehindu.com/books/literary-review/) [Know Your
English](http://www.thehindu.com/books/know-your-english/)

Videos

[Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/)

Features

[Cinema](http://www.thehindu.com/features/cinema/)
[Downtown](http://www.thehindu.com/features/downtown/) [Education
Plus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/education/) [Friday
Review](http://www.thehindu.com/features/friday-review/)
[Magazine](http://www.thehindu.com/features/magazine/)
[Metroplus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/) [Property
Plus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/homes-and-gardens/) [Young
World](http://www.thehindu.com/features/kids/) [In
School](http://www.thehindu.com/in-school/)
[Empower](http://www.thehindu.com/features/empower/)

Specials

[Specials](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/) [In
Depth](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/in-depth/) [Live
Chat](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/live-chat/)
[Timelines](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/timelines/)
[Data](http://www.thehindu.com/data/)

Sport

[Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/)
[Cricket](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/)
[Football](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/football/)
[Hockey](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/hockey/)
[Tennis](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/tennis/)
[Races](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/races/) [Other
Sports](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/)

Sci-Tech

[Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/)
[Environment](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/)
[Health](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/)
[Science](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/)
[Technology](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/)
[Gadgets](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/gadgets/)
[Internet](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/internet/)

  * [News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/ "News, International, National, Cities" )
    * [![A scene in Mayurimarg Hyderabad showing many vehicles partially submerged under flood waters. Photo: K.V.S. Giri](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Hyd_rains_3017628i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-throws-life-out-of-gear-in-hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Incessant rain throws life out of gear in
Hyderabad](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-
throws-life-out-of-gear-in-
hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, Minister for Irrigation M.B. Patil
and Minister for Home G. Parameshwara heading for a meeting to discuss Carvery
issue at Vidhana Soudha . Photo: V. Sreenivasa
Murthy](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/CM_3017744i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-issue-bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BJP to boycott all-party meet convened by
Siddaramaiah](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-issue-
bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![A securityman stops a vehicle during curfew in Srinagar on Tuesday. Photo:
Nissar
Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Kashmir_3017047i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national
/many-militants-killed-in-uri-as-army-foils-
infiltration/article9128296.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Jawan killed as Army foils infiltration bids in
Kashmir](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/many-militants-killed-in-uri-
as-army-foils-
infiltration/article9128296.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[International   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/) [National
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/) [Cities
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/)

  * [National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/ "National, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Other States" )
    * [![Youths line up outside the office of the Superintendent of Police, Pulwama, south Kashmir, to apply for the post of Special Police Officer on Tuesday. Photo: Nissar Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Valley_3017209i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/one-injured-64-arrested-in-valley/article9128893.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [One injured, 64 arrested in Valley
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/one-injured-64-arrested-
in-
valley/article9128893.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/China_3017210i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national
/china-caught-in-a-corridor-of-
uncertainty/article9129331.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [China caught in a corridor of
uncertainty](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/china-caught-in-a-corridor-
of-
uncertainty/article9129331.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka vehicles are not being allowed beyond Attibele check post. Photo:
K.C.
Deepika](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/Attibele_3016667i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-row-sc-directs-karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Cauvery Row: SC directs Karnataka to release 6,000 cusecs a day to Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-row-sc-directs-
karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Andhra Pradesh   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/) [Kerala
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Telangana
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other States
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)

[Andhra Pradesh   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/) [Kerala
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Telangana
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other States
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)

  * [International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/ "International, South Asia, World" )
    * [![US President Barack Obama addresses the 71st session of United Nations General Assembly at the UN headquarters in New York on on Tuesday.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Obama_3017590i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/us-president-barack-obama-farewell-address-at-the-united-nations-general-assembly/article9130850.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Obama hits at populist strongmen in last UN
address](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/us-president-barack-obama-
farewell-address-at-the-united-nations-general-
assembly/article9130850.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif speaks during a high-level meeting at
the United Nations General Assembly in Manhattan in New
York.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Sharif_3017588i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international
/pakistan-prime-minister-nawaz-sharif-on-kashmir-issue-at-the-united-nations-
general-
assembly/article9130836.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Sharif raising Kashmir with all leaders amid isolation
fears](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/pakistan-prime-minister-
nawaz-sharif-on-kashmir-issue-at-the-united-nations-general-
assembly/article9130836.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![PakistanPrime Minister Nawaz Sharif speaks during a high-level meeting on
addressing large movements of refugees and migrants at the United Nations
General Assembly in Manhattan in New
York.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/SHARIF_3016590i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international
/pakistan-prime-minister-nawaz-sharif-meets-us-secretary-of-state-john-kerry-
on-the-sidelines-of-71st-
unga/article9127284.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Kerry asks Pakistan not to allow safe haven for
terrorists](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/pakistan-prime-
minister-nawaz-sharif-meets-us-secretary-of-state-john-kerry-on-the-sidelines-
of-71st-
unga/article9127284.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![General Officer Commanding of Army’s 15 Corps Lt. General Subrata Saha
looks at items recovered from militants who were killed after their attack on
an Army camp at Uri, at the Army headquarters in Srinagar on Sunday. Photo:
Nissar Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/AMMINATION-
URI_223_3016570i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/uri-attack-
us-lawmakers-express-solidarity-with-
india/article9126939.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Uri attack: Bipartisan backing for India in
US](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/uri-attack-us-lawmakers-
express-solidarity-with-
india/article9126939.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[South Asia   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/south-asia/)
[World   ](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/world/)

[South Asia   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/south-asia/)
[World   ](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/world/)

  * [Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/ "Opinion, Cartoon, Columns, Editorial, Interview, Lead, Letters, Comment, Open Page, Readers' Editor" )
    * [![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/160921_-_Oped_-_wh_3017002i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/m-k-narayanan-on-indiapakistan-diplomacy-and-terrorism/article9128770.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [The best among limited options](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/m-k
-narayanan-on-indiapakistan-diplomacy-and-
terrorism/article9128770.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![unrecognised: “There is a clear distinction in the functioning of central
banks in advanced and emerging market economies.” The RBI headquarters in
Mumbai.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/21TH_RBI_2_3016990i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion
/op-ed/an-independent-rbi-is-a-chimera-writes-charan-
singh/article9128747.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [ An independent RBI is a chimera](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed
/an-independent-rbi-is-a-chimera-writes-charan-
singh/article9128747.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Responding to Uri](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/india-
respoding-to-uri-terrorist-
attack/article9124984.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

Gathering evidence regarding the four terrorists who stormed the army base in
U...

### [Copyright and copy-making](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial
/delhi-hc-verdict-on-university-photocopying-case-copyright-and-
copymaking/article9128736.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

The Delhi High Court verdict that photocopying portions of academic
publication...

[Cartoon   |](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/cartoon/) [Columns
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/) [Editorial
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/) [Interview
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/interview/) [Lead
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/) [Letters
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/letters/) [Comment
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/) [Open Page
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/open-page/) [Readers' Editor
](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/)

  * [Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/ "Business, Agri-Business, Budget, Industry, Economy, Markets, Stock Quotes" )
    * [![Flipkart is the first e-commerce company in the country to hit the 100 million customers milestone. File Photo: G.R.N Somashekar](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/21in_Flipkart__2__3017615i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/flipkart-crosses-100-million-customers-milestone/article9131081.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Flipkart crosses 100 million customers milestone
](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/flipkart-crosses-100-million-
customers-
milestone/article9131081.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/TH21_GERMAN_AMBASS_3016969i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy
/high-import-duties-trade-pact-impasse-irk-
germany/article9128717.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [High import duties, trade pact impasse irk
Germany](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/high-import-duties-trade-
pact-impasse-irk-
germany/article9128717.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![TELECOM WARS: Bharti Airtel says deficiencies in Reliance Jio’s own network
are causing the call failures.—FILE
PHOTO](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03014/jio_3014963i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry
/reliance-jio-bharti-airtel-battle-
escalates/article9121187.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Reliance Jio, Bharti Airtel battle
escalates](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/reliance-jio-bharti-
airtel-battle-
escalates/article9121187.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![TAX CONUNDRUM: Ministry officials said the Centre still enjoys powers to
collect excise duty despite
notification.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/gst_3016028i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy
/gst-notification-triggers-uncertainty-over-excise-
duty/article9124982.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [GST notification triggers uncertainty over excise duty
](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/gst-notification-triggers-
uncertainty-over-excise-
duty/article9124982.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Agri-Business   |](http://www.thehindu.com/business/agri-business/) [Budget
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/) [Industry
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/) [Economy
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/) [Markets
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/markets/) [Stock Quotes
](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/)

  * [Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/ "Sport, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Tennis, Races, Other Sports" )
    * [![Pakistan's Test captain Misbah-ul-Haq holds the mace handed over by ICC chief executive David Richardson during a ceremony at Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore on Wednesday. Misbah-ul-Haq says it's a big achievement to lead Pakistan to No. 1 in test rankings, given the team has not played on home soil for seven years.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/PAKISTAN_TEST_MACE_3017721i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/pakistan-awarded-icc-test-championship-mace/article9131533.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Pakistan awarded ICC Test Championship
mace](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/pakistan-awarded-icc-test-
championship-
mace/article9131533.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![M.S.K.
Prasad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/MSK_PRASAD_3017732i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket
/bcci-appoints-former-wicketkeeper-msk-prasad-as-chairman-of-
selectors/article9131577.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BCCI defies Lodha panel, MSK Prasad heads selection committee
](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/bcci-appoints-former-wicketkeeper-msk-
prasad-as-chairman-of-
selectors/article9131577.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Kabaddi team captain Anup Kumar \(left\) speaks with former cricket captain
Kapil Dev during an event in Mumbai on Tuesday. The Kabaddi World Cup is
scheduled to be held from October 7 to 22 in
Gujarat.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/INDIA_KABADDI_3016832i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport
/other-sports/world-kabaddi-championships-2016-anup-kumar-to-lead-
india/article9128173.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Anup Kumar to lead India in Kabaddi World
Cup](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/world-kabaddi-
championships-2016-anup-kumar-to-lead-
india/article9128173.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![BACK IN THE HUNT: Veteran administrator N. Srinivasan seems to have turned
the tide in his favour suddenly. FILE PHOTO: M.
Vedhan](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/TH21SRINIVASAN__3017207i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket
/srinivasan-emerges-favourite-for-icc-
role/article9129332.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Srinivasan emerges favourite for ICC
role](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/srinivasan-emerges-favourite-for-
icc-
role/article9129332.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Cricket   |](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/) [Football
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/football/) [Hockey
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/hockey/) [Tennis
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/tennis/) [Races
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/races/) [Other Sports
](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/)

  * [Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/ "Videos, Entertainment, News, Sports" )
  * [Features](http://www.thehindu.com/features/ "Features, Cinema, Downtown, Education Plus, Friday Review, Property Plus, Metroplus, Magazine, Young World, Lit for Life, November Fest" )
  * [Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/ "Sci-Tech, Technology, Environment, Health, Science, Agriculture" )
  * [Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/crossword/ "Crossword" )

###

» Today's Paper » TAMIL NADU

MADURAI,  February 15, 2015

# ‘More foodgrain lost due to pests, diseases’

  * Special Correspondent

[print](?css=print "Print" )   ·   [T]( "Change Text Size" )  [T]( "Change
Text Size" )   [T+](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-
tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece?textsize=large&test=1 "Large Text Size" )  ·
[T-](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-
foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-diseases/article6898016.ece?textsize=small&test=2
"Small Text Size" )

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/PinExt.png)](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://www.thehindu.com
/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece&media=http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13
-feb-thsam-TN_MA_2311374g.jpg&description=‘More foodgrain lost due to pests,
diseases’)

[](http://addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=thehindu "Share via more
services" )

![Challenges now:Participants at a convention and symposium held at
Agricultural College and Research Institute in
Madurai.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13-feb-thsam-
TN_MA_2311374e.jpg)

Challenges now:Participants at a convention and symposium held at Agricultural
College and Research Institute in Madurai.

Though the country had become self-reliant in production of foodgrains and
cereals, 22 to 25 per cent of losses were caused by pests and diseases, said
P.K. Chakrabarty, Assistant Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, on Thursday.

Inaugurating a three-day annual convention and national symposium on
'Challenges and management approaches for crop diseases of national
importance,' organised to commemorate the golden jubilee celebrations of
Agricultural College and Research Institute here, Dr. Chakrabarty said
climatic change, change in cropping pattern, indiscriminate use of botanical
modules, mono cropping system, insufficient domestic quarantine and
introduction of newer pesticides in the market were the reasons for the
increased number of pathogens.

Efficient use of pesticides and introduction of uniform integrated pest and
disease management system for all crops, which would avoid confusion among
farmers, would play a key role in management of pests and diseases, he said.

K. Ramasamy, Vice-Chancellor, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, in his
presidential address, insisted on development of suitable pest control
mechanisms that would help farmers in protecting their crops.

Those who addressed the inaugural session included A.N. Sabalpara and Pokkar
Rawal of Indian Society of Mycology and Plant Pathology; R. Ravindran,
Registrar, M. Maheswaran, K. Ramaraju and N. Ragupathi, Directors, TNAU, and
C. Chinnusamy, Dean, Agricultural College and Research Institute.

More In: [TAMIL NADU](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-
tamilnadu/) | [NATIONAL](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/PinExt.png)](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://www.thehindu.com
/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece&media=http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13
-feb-thsam-TN_MA_2311374g.jpg&description=‘More foodgrain lost due to pests,
diseases’)

[](http://addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=thehindu "Share via more
services" )

[Email the Editor](mailto:letters@thehindu.co.in "Email the Editor " )

![Today's
Paper](http://www.thehindu.com//todayThumb?templateURL=template/1-0-1)
[Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" )
[ePaper](http://epaper.thehindu.com/ "ePaper" ) [This Day That
Age](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-miscellaneous/ "This Day That
Age" ) [Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-miscellaneous/
"Crossword" ) [Archive](http://www.thehindu.com/archive/ "Archive" )

##### Group Sites

[The Hindu](http://www.thehindu.com/ "The Hindu" ) [தி
இந்து](http://tamil.thehindu.com/ "தி இந்து" ) [Business
Line](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/ "Business Line" ) [BL on
Campus](http://www.bloncampus.com/ "BL on Campus" )
[Sportstarlive](http://www.sportstarlive.com/ "Sportstarlive" )
[Frontline](http://www.frontline.in/ "Frontline" ) [The Hindu
Centre](http://www.thehinducentre.com/ "The Hindu Centre" )
[Images](http://www.thehinduimages.com/ "Images" )
[Classifieds](http://www.thehinduclassifieds.in/ "Classifieds" )
[RoofandFloor](http://www.roofandfloor.com/?utm_source=thehindu&utm_medium
=Side-widget&utm_campaign=Internal-Marketing "RoofandFloor" )

  

O  
P  
E  
N

close

#### Recent Article in TAMIL NADU

### [Education fair on Sunday](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-
national/tp-tamilnadu/education-fair-on-
sunday/article9129902.ece?ref=sliderNews)

IDP Education India, the leading student placement service provider will
organize UK, USA, Canada and New Zealand Education Fair on Sunday, ...
[»](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/education-
fair-on-sunday/article9129902.ece?ref=sliderNews)

  

**The Hindu:** [ Home](http://www.thehindu.com/ "Home" ) | [ Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" ) | [ News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/ "News" ) | [ National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/ "National" ) | [ International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/ "International" ) | [ Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/ "Opinion" ) | [ Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/ "Business" ) | [ Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/ "Sport" ) | [ Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/ "Videos" ) | [ Features](http://www.thehindu.com/features/ "Features" ) | [ Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/ "Sci-Tech" ) | [ Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/crossword/ "Crossword" ) |   
**The Site:** | [About Us](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=aboutus "About Us" ) | [Terms of Use](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=termsofuse "Terms of Use" ) | [Privacy Policy](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=privacypolicy "Privacy Policy" ) | [Contacts](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=contact "Contacts" ) | [Archive](http://www.thehindu.com/archive/ "archive" ) | [Subscribe](http://www.thehindugroup.in/subscribe/ "Subscribe" ) | [RSS Feeds](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=rss "RSS Feeds" ) | [Site Map](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=sitemap "Site Map" )   
**Group Sites: ** [The Hindu](http://www.thehindu.com/ "The Hindu" ) | [தி இந்து](http://tamil.thehindu.com/ "தி இந்து" ) | [Business Line](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/ "Business Line" ) | [BL on Campus](http://www.bloncampus.com/ "BL on Campus" ) | [Sportstarlive](http://www.sportstarlive.com/ "Sportstarlive" ) | [Frontline](http://www.frontline.in/ "Frontline" ) | [The Hindu Centre](http://www.thehinducentre.com/ "The Hindu Centre" ) | [RoofandFloor](https://roofandfloor.com/?utm_source=thehindu&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=Internal-Marketing "RoofandFloor" ) |   
[Publications](http://www.thehindu.com/publications/ "Publications" ) |
[eBooks](http://www.thehindu.com/ebooks/ "eBooks" ) |
[Images](http://www.thehinduimages.com/ "Images" ) |
[Classifieds](http://www.thehinduclassifieds.in/ "Classifieds" ) |

####  Comments to:
[web.thehindu@thehindu.co.in](mailto:web.thehindu@thehindu.co.in)
Copyright(C) 2016, The Hindu

![](http://www.thehindu.com/eae-
logger/Logger?rt=1&ctxId=749&pubId=4&cat=&objId=6898016&title=%e2%80%98More+foodgrain+lost+due+to+pests%2c+diseases%e2%80%99&url=archive%2c2015-02-15+00%3a00%3a00.0%2chttp%3a%2f%2fwww.thehindu.com
%2ftodays-paper%2ftp-national%2ftp-tamilnadu%2fmore-foodgrain-lost-due-to-
pests-diseases%2farticle6898016.ece&amp;type=article&amp;meta=ns)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/963357032/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

Agricultre
 
 
DEGREE STANDARD
 
 
 
1. IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE
 
 
Importance of Agriculture in Indian Economy and its sectoral
 
relationship 
-
 
Agricultural Development 
through five year plans in India and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Growth pattern of crops in India and Tamil Nadu in 
terms of area, production and productivity.
 
 
2. CROP PRODUCTION
 
 
Factors of Production 
-
 
Agricultural seasons of I
ndia and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Cropping patterns in India and 
Tamil Nadu 
-
 
package of practices of different crops 
-
 
Agro
-
Climatic zones of India and Tamil Nadu and 
their features 
-
 
Weather and Climate 
-
 
Weather forecasting. Soil 
-
 
Soil structure 
-
 
Factors influenc
ing 
soil structure 
-
 
Physical and Chemical properties 
-
 
Effect of nutrient availability and plant growth 
-
 
Problem soils and their management 
-
 
Soil survey 
-
 
its objectives and scope 
-
 
Soil fertility and 
productivity 
-
 
Organic manures, green manures, bio f
ertilizers 
-
 
Balanced usage 
-
 
integrated nutrient 
management 
-
 
Physiological disorders in crop plants and their management 
-
 
Dry farming 
-
 
Rainfed 
agriculture 
-
 
Conservation of soil and water 
-
 
Watershed and waste land development.
 
 
3. CROP IMPROVEMENT
 
 
Pr
inciples of breeding 
-
 
Breeding methods 
-
 
Modern tools in crop improvement 
-
 
Hybrid production 
-
 
Latest varieties of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Application of bio technology in Agriculture 
-
 
Tissue 
culture & its significance 
-
 
Transgenic Plants.
 
Seeds 
-
 
I
mportance of quality seeds in Agriculture 
-
 
Nucleus, Breeder, foundation, certified and 
labelled seeds 
-
 
Seed certification techniques and processes in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Seed testing 
-
 
Used 
village concept.
 
 
4. CROP PROTECTION
 
 
Importance of pest, disease and w
eed management in agriculture 
-
 
pest and disease surveillance and 
forecasting weather on pest and disease incidence 
-
 
Symptoms of damages and control measures of 
pest and diseases of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Integrated post and disease management in cro
p 
production 
-
 
Pesticide and their use 
-
 
Pattern 
-
 
plant production equipments and their use 
-
 
Plant 
quarantine.
 
Storage pests and disease and their management. Importance of biological control in insect 
management. Weeds 
-
 
Major weeds and their control.
 
 
5. CROP MANAGEMENT
 
 
Land use pattern and planning 
-
 
Size and distribution of holdings 
-
 
types and systems of farming 
-
 
Water resources development and management 
-
 
Irrigation management of different crops 
-
 
Command area development 
-
 
Ground water Developme
nt and Conjunctive use 
-
 
Water use efficiency 
-
 
Quality of irrigation water 
-
 
Its effect in soil and crops 
-
 
Management of poor quality water for crop 
growth.
 
Cropping system and integrated farming 
-
 
Recycling of agricultural waste 
-
 
Mushroom cultivation, 
bee 
keeping, silkwork rearing etc., Engery in Agricultural production 
-
 
Sources 
-
 
Solar, wind, animal, 
biomass and biogas 
-
 
Mechnisation in agriculture 
-
 
Tractors & tillers 
-
 
Agricultural implemets and 
Machineries and their usage.
 
Farm management 
-
 
Princip
les of farm business management 
-
 
Cost concepts 
-
 
Management of 
resources 
-
 
Farm Planning and budgeting 
-
 
Investment analysis 
-
 
Agricultural credit system in India 
-
 
Multi credit delivery system 
-
 
Role of nationalised banks and Regional Rural Banks 
-
 
Lead 
Bank 
Scheme 
-
 
Service area 
-
 
approach 
-
 
Scale of finance.
 
Agricultre
 
 
DEGREE STANDARD
 
 
 
1. IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE
 
 
Importance of Agriculture in Indian Economy and its sectoral
 
relationship 
-
 
Agricultural Development 
through five year plans in India and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Growth pattern of crops in India and Tamil Nadu in 
terms of area, production and productivity.
 
 
2. CROP PRODUCTION
 
 
Factors of Production 
-
 
Agricultural seasons of I
ndia and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Cropping patterns in India and 
Tamil Nadu 
-
 
package of practices of different crops 
-
 
Agro
-
Climatic zones of India and Tamil Nadu and 
their features 
-
 
Weather and Climate 
-
 
Weather forecasting. Soil 
-
 
Soil structure 
-
 
Factors influenc
ing 
soil structure 
-
 
Physical and Chemical properties 
-
 
Effect of nutrient availability and plant growth 
-
 
Problem soils and their management 
-
 
Soil survey 
-
 
its objectives and scope 
-
 
Soil fertility and 
productivity 
-
 
Organic manures, green manures, bio f
ertilizers 
-
 
Balanced usage 
-
 
integrated nutrient 
management 
-
 
Physiological disorders in crop plants and their management 
-
 
Dry farming 
-
 
Rainfed 
agriculture 
-
 
Conservation of soil and water 
-
 
Watershed and waste land development.
 
 
3. CROP IMPROVEMENT
 
 
Pr
inciples of breeding 
-
 
Breeding methods 
-
 
Modern tools in crop improvement 
-
 
Hybrid production 
-
 
Latest varieties of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Application of bio technology in Agriculture 
-
 
Tissue 
culture & its significance 
-
 
Transgenic Plants.
 
Seeds 
-
 
I
mportance of quality seeds in Agriculture 
-
 
Nucleus, Breeder, foundation, certified and 
labelled seeds 
-
 
Seed certification techniques and processes in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Seed testing 
-
 
Used 
village concept.
 
 
4. CROP PROTECTION
 
 
Importance of pest, disease and w
eed management in agriculture 
-
 
pest and disease surveillance and 
forecasting weather on pest and disease incidence 
-
 
Symptoms of damages and control measures of 
pest and diseases of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Integrated post and disease management in cro
p 
production 
-
 
Pesticide and their use 
-
 
Pattern 
-
 
plant production equipments and their use 
-
 
Plant 
quarantine.
 
Storage pests and disease and their management. Importance of biological control in insect 
management. Weeds 
-
 
Major weeds and their control.
 
 
5. CROP MANAGEMENT
 
 
Land use pattern and planning 
-
 
Size and distribution of holdings 
-
 
types and systems of farming 
-
 
Water resources development and management 
-
 
Irrigation management of different crops 
-
 
Command area development 
-
 
Ground water Developme
nt and Conjunctive use 
-
 
Water use efficiency 
-
 
Quality of irrigation water 
-
 
Its effect in soil and crops 
-
 
Management of poor quality water for crop 
growth.
 
Cropping system and integrated farming 
-
 
Recycling of agricultural waste 
-
 
Mushroom cultivation, 
bee 
keeping, silkwork rearing etc., Engery in Agricultural production 
-
 
Sources 
-
 
Solar, wind, animal, 
biomass and biogas 
-
 
Mechnisation in agriculture 
-
 
Tractors & tillers 
-
 
Agricultural implemets and 
Machineries and their usage.
 
Farm management 
-
 
Princip
les of farm business management 
-
 
Cost concepts 
-
 
Management of 
resources 
-
 
Farm Planning and budgeting 
-
 
Investment analysis 
-
 
Agricultural credit system in India 
-
 
Multi credit delivery system 
-
 
Role of nationalised banks and Regional Rural Banks 
-
 
Lead 
Bank 
Scheme 
-
 
Service area 
-
 
approach 
-
 
Scale of finance.
 
Agricultre
 
 
Marketing 
-
 
Agricultural marketing and price policy of Agricultural commodities 
-
 
Market structure 
-
 
Warehouses & rural godowns 
-
 
Post harvest technologies 
-
 
Agri business management 
-
 
Marketing 
Ins
titutions.
 
Policies for agricultural development 
-
 
Economic liberalisation 
-
 
WTO and its impact on agricultural 
export. Extension methods for transfer of technology 
-
 
Agriocultural Information technology 
-
 
Role of 
women in Agriculture.
 
 
![](/pix/lawslogo.png)

[![](/pix/prslogo3.png)](http://www.prsindia.org/)

  * [Home](http://www.lawsofindia.org/index.php)
  * [About](http://www.lawsofindia.org/aboutus.php)
  * [State](http://www.lawsofindia.org/thestates.php)
  * [Advanced Search](http://www.lawsofindia.org/advanced.php)
  * [Contact us](http://www.lawsofindia.org/contactus.php)

[ Sign In
](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
| [Register ](/regform.php)

**Username**  
  
---  
**Password**  
  
  
Remember Me  
  
[Forgot Password](/forgot.php)  
  

[ _**Register**_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/regform.php) (Downloading laws
require registration)

## Search Laws

  

## State Lists

  * **[Andhra Pradesh** _(204 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/18/Andhra Pradesh.html)
  * **[Arunachal Pradesh** _(48 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/14/Arunachal Pradesh.html)
  * **[Assam** _(138 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/29/Assam.html)
  * **[Bihar** _(54 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/34/Bihar.html)
  * **[Chhattisgarh** _(58 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/22/Chhattisgarh.html)
  * **[Delhi** _(63 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/21/Delhi.html)
  * **[Goa** _(163 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/35/Goa.html)
  * **[Gujarat** _(294 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/13/Gujarat.html)
  * **[Haryana** _(326 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/15/Haryana.html)
  * **[Himachal Pradesh** _(237 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/23/Himachal Pradesh.html)
  * **[Jammu And Kashmir** _(263 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/32/Jammu And Kashmir.html)
  * **[Jharkhand** _(35 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/28/Jharkhand.html)
  * **[Karnataka** _(294 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/19/Karnataka.html)
  * **[Kerala** _(317 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/11/Kerala.html)
  * **[Madhya Pradesh** _(111 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/33/Madhya Pradesh.html)
  * **[Maharashtra** _(516 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/38/Maharashtra.html)
  * **[Manipur** _(18 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/30/Manipur.html)
  * **[Meghalaya** _(121 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/36/Meghalaya.html)
  * **[Mizoram** _(34 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/31/Mizoram.html)
  * **[Nagaland** _(78 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/17/Nagaland.html)
  * **[Orissa** _(210 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/20/Orissa.html)
  * **[Puducherry** _(68 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/24/Puducherry.html)
  * **[Punjab** _(236 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/25/Punjab.html)
  * **[Rajasthan** _(32 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/37/Rajasthan.html)
  * **[Sikkim** _(86 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/12/Sikkim.html)
  * **[Tamil Nadu** _(614 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/26/Tamil Nadu.html)
  * **[Tripura** _(60 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/9/Tripura.html)
  * **[Uttar Pradesh** _(335 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/7/Uttar Pradesh.html)
  * **[Uttarakhand** _(67 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/16/Uttarakhand.html)
  * **[West Bengal** _(376 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/27/West Bengal.html)
  *  

** The Tamil Nadu Agricultural Pests and Diseases Act, 1919**

  

Act No : 3 of 1919

Keywords : Insect Pest, Plant Disease, Noxious Weed, Plant, Occupier, Director
of Agriculture

  
  
  

Amendment appended: 28 of 1982

  

[![Bookmark and Share](http://s7.addthis.com/static/btn/v2/lg-share-
en.gif)](http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&pub=prsindia)

[ ** Download Pdf (2437 KB)
**](/downloadfile.php?lawid=5212&file=tamil_nadu/1919/1919TN3.pdf&pageurl=%2Fstatelaw%2F5212%2FTheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
|  [**Add
Keywords**](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
|  **[Report
Error](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)**
|  **Disclaimer**

DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by
PRS Legislative Research (PRS). The contents of this document have been
obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These contents have not
been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to
the accuracy, completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act
and/or some Amendment Act may not be available. Principal Acts may or may not
include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the
relevant state department concerned or refer to the latest government
publication or the gazette notification. Any person using this material should
take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information
contained in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept
any liability arising from the use of this document. PRS or any persons
connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the
basis of this document.

**Choose another year for the list of laws from Tamil Nadu**

The list of years in which laws have been enacted may not be complete.

1837183918491851185818591862186418651866  
  
1867186918731876187818791882188418851886  
  
1888188918901891189218931894189618981899  
  
1900190219041905190819111914191819191920  
  
1922192319241925192619271928192919301931  
  
1933193419351936193719381939194019411942  
  
1943194519471948194919501951195219531954  
  
1955195619571958195919601961196219631964  
  
1965196619671968196919701971197219731974  
  
1975197619771978197919801981198219831985  
  
1986198719881989199119921993199419951996  
  
1997199819992000200120022003200520062007  
  
2008200920102011201220132014

![](//in-
gmtdmp.mookie1.com/t/v2/learn?tagid=V2_2454&src.rand=\[timestamp\]&src.id=BusinessStd)

  * [Home](/)
  * [Markets](/markets)
  * [Companies](/companies)
  * [Opinion](/opinion)
  * [Politics](/politics)
  * [Technology](/technology)
  * [Specials](/specials)
  * [PF](/pf)
  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

  * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
  * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
  * [Economy](/economy-policy)
  * [Finance](/finance)
  * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
  * [International](/international)
  * [Management](/management)
  * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
  * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
  * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
  * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [News](/markets-news)
  * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
  * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
  * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
  * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
  * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
  * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
  * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [News](/companies-news)
  * [Results](/companies-results)
  * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
  * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
  * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
  * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
  * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
  * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
  * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
  * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
  * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Punditry](/punditry)
  * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
  * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
  * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
  * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
  * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
  * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
  * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
  * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
  * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
  * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
  * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
  * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [News](/technology-news)
  * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
  * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
  * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
  * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
  * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
  * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
  * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
  * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
  * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
  * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
  * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
  * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
  * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [News](/pf-news)
  * [Features](/pf-features)
  * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
  * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
  * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
  * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
  * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
  * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)
  * [Markets](/markets)
    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)
  * [Companies](/companies)
    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)
  * [Opinion](/opinion)
    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)
  * [Politics](/politics)
    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)
  * [Technology](/technology)
    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)
  * [Specials](/specials)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)
  * [PF](/pf)
    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)
  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)
    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)

    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [Markets](/markets)

    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [Companies](/companies)

    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Opinion](/opinion)

    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [Politics](/politics)

    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [Technology](/technology)

    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Specials](/specials)

    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [PF](/pf)

    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)

  * [My Page](/user/my-page)

  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)

    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [Markets](/markets)

    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [Companies](/companies)

    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Opinion](/opinion)

    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [Politics](/politics)

    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [Technology](/technology)

    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Specials](/specials)

    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [PF](/pf)

    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * BS APPS 
    * [iPad](/ipad "Download BS IPAD App" )
    * [iPhone](/iphone "Download BS IPHONE App" )
    * [Android](/android "Download BS ANDROID App" )
    * [Wap](/wap "Business Standard on Mobile" )
  * BS PRODUCTS 
    * [Smart Investor](http://smartinvestor.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Hindi](http://hindi.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Motoring](http://www.bsmotoring.com/)
    * [BS Books](http://books.business-standard.com/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper)
    * [Economy &amp; Industry](http://books.business-standard.com/magazine.php#eco)
  * BS SPECIALS 
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
  * [BS E-Paper](http://epaper.business-standard.com)

  * Hi, 
    * [Change Password](/user/change-password)
    * [Subscribe](/subscription-cart)
    * [ Sign out](/user/sign-out)
    * [Change Password](/user/change-password)
    * [Manage My Account](/subscription-cart/manage)
    * [](/subscription-cart/product)
    * [ Sign out](/user/sign-out)
  * [SIGN IN](javascript:void\(0\);)
  * [Subscribe](/subscription-cart)

  * [ ](http://www.facebook.com/bsindia "Find Us on Facebook" )
  * [ ](https://plus.google.com/105513640026823338822 "Follow on Google Plus" )
  * [ ](https://in.linkedin.com/company/business-standard "Connect on Linkedin" )
  * [ ](http://twitter.com/bsindia "Follow Us on Twitter" )
  * [ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/BusinessStandardLtd "Subscribe Us on Youtube" )
  * [ ](/rss-feeds/listing/ "RSS Feed" )

[![Business Standard](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/business-standard-logo.png)](/)

TRENDING ON BS

  * [ #CauveryDispute](http://www.business-standard.com/search?q=cauvery&company-code=)

  *   * News Stock Quote Authors
  * [](javascript:void\(0\);)

 News |    Stock Quote |    Authors  
---|---|---  
  
[PTI Stories](/category/pti-stories-139.htm) » [National](/category/pti-
stories-national-13902.htm) » [News](/category/pti-stories-national-
news-1390201.htm)

# Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and [Tamil Nadu
](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural University (TNAU) has come out
with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt.

![image]()

Press Trust of India

Business Standard

http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/_media/bs/wap/images/bs_logo_amp.png 177
22

[![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-09/thumb/Todays_paper_super_728x90_fis-1473150529.png)](http://www.fisglobal.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/advertisement/images/kotak_728x90.jpg)](http://www.kotak.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-09/thumb/Todays_paper_super_728x90_capgemini-1473150530.jpg)](https://www.capgemini.com/)

[Business Standard](https://plus.google.com/105513640026823338822?rel=author)

# Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

Press Trust of India  |  Coimbatore  April 20, 2015 Last Updated at 13:22 IST

[ ![Tiny URL](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon/link-icon.png)
](javascript:void\(0\);) [ ![Add to My Page](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/addto_mypage.jpg) ](/user/my-page
/add-article/item-id/115042000310) [ ![Print](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/print.jpg) ](http://www.business-
standard.com/article/printer-friendly-version?article_id=115042000310_1) [
![Email](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/email.jpg) ](javascript:void\(0\);
"Email this page" )

[![](/include/_mod/site/images/close_img.png)](javascript:showhideEmailBox\('article','n'\);)

## email this article

Message: |  | Recipients' Email: |  Type address separated by commas  
---|---|---|---  
Your Email:|  |  | ![](/include/_mod/site/images/refresh_btn.png)Enter the
characters shown in the image.  
Send me a copy:  |  
  |  |  
  
http://mybs.in/2RufpBo

  

Copy tiny URL to save and share articles.

  * ## ALSO READ

[Tamil Nadu Newsprint &amp; Papers standalone net profit rises 2.09% in the
December 2014 quarter](/article/news-cm/tamil-nadu-newsprint-papers-
standalone-net-profit-rises-2-09-in-the-december-2014-quarter-
115021300188_1.html) [Tamil Nadu Newsprint &amp; Papers standalone net profit
declines 23.82% in the September 2014 quarter](/article/news-cm/tamil-nadu-
newsprint-papers-standalone-net-profit-declines-23-82-in-the-september-2014
-quarter-114111300302_1.html) [CCI dismisses case against Tamil Nadu's tax
authorities](/article/pti-stories/cci-dismisses-case-against-tamil-nadu-s-tax-
authorities-114103100764_1.html) [Tata Docomo looking to double turnover from
rural Tamil Nadu](/article/pti-stories/tata-docomo-looking-to-double-turnover-
from-rural-tamil-nadu-115041001093_1.html) [Professional mourner from Tamil
Nadu exhibits grief show](/article/pti-stories/professional-mourner-from-
tamil-nadu-exhibits-grief-show-115020500638_1.html)

  * 

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and [Tamil Nadu
](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural University (TNAU) has come out
with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.

  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt.

  * Read More On
  * ## [National News](/search?type=news&q=National+News)

|

## [Tamil Nadu](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)

|

## [Pti Stories](/category/pti-stories-139.htm)

|

## [News](/category/pti-stories-national-news-1390201.htm)

PREVIOUS STORY

NEXT STORY

![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon
/prev-icon.jpg) ![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon/next-icon.jpg)

##

##### RECOMMENDED FOR YOU

  

Advertisements

  * [Should You Rely Only on Your Corporate Health Insurance?](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1361)
  * [MIT Sloan Executive Program in General Management](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1359)
  * [New to the stock market? Take your FirstStep](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1355)
  * [Super Saver Health Insurance for Whole Family](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1352)
  * [Buy New Age Health Insurance with Added Benefits](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1351)
  * [Serve the next wave-bring mobile broad band to everyone](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1362)
  * [Open Free Demat A/c with low brokerage fee](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1356)
  * [MIT Sloan EPGM: Get Alumni benefits, Apply Now](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1360)

## Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

###

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) has come
out with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers This was to create
awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the insect pests and
diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant Protection Studies,
TNAU, said. Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of
which appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker
borders. Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said. To ... Due to
abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of Tamil Nadu,
there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and diseases in
rice crop and [Tamil Nadu ](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural
University (TNAU) has come out with a special forecast for the benefit of
farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt. ![image]()

Press Trust of India

Business Standard

http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/_media/bs/wap/images/bs_logo_amp.png 177
22

[![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-06/thumb/Todays_paper_footer_728x90_fis-1465558769.png)](http://www.fisglobal.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/advertisement/images/kotak_728x90.jpg)](http://www.kotak.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-06/thumb/Todays_paper_footer_728x90_capgemini-1465558769.jpg)](https://www.capgemini.com/)

## MORE ON MARKETS:

##### Quick Links

  * ###### [Stock Market Live](/markets-stocks)

  * ###### [Portfolio ](/portfolio)

  * ###### [Commodity Market](/markets-commodities)

  * ###### [Upcoming IPO](/markets-ipos)

  * ###### [Personal Finance](/pf)

  * ###### [Stock Market News](/markets-news)

  * ###### [Derivatives](/markets-derivatives)

  * ###### [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)

  * ###### [Gold Price](/live-market/commodity/search/symbol/GOLD/exchng/mcx)

  * ###### [Sensex](/stocks/market-statistics/bse/index-components?indices=1001)

##### Browse STOCK Companies

  * [A](/stocks/stock-quote-list/a)
  * [B](/stocks/stock-quote-list/b)
  * [C](/stocks/stock-quote-list/c)
  * [D](/stocks/stock-quote-list/d)
  * [E](/stocks/stock-quote-list/e)
  * [F](/stocks/stock-quote-list/f)
  * [G](/stocks/stock-quote-list/g)
  * [H](/stocks/stock-quote-list/h)
  * [I](/stocks/stock-quote-list/i)
  * [J](/stocks/stock-quote-list/j)
  * [K](/stocks/stock-quote-list/k)
  * [L](/stocks/stock-quote-list/l)
  * [M](/stocks/stock-quote-list/m)
  * [N](/stocks/stock-quote-list/n)
  * [O](/stocks/stock-quote-list/o)
  * [P](/stocks/stock-quote-list/p)
  * [Q](/stocks/stock-quote-list/q)
  * [R](/stocks/stock-quote-list/r)
  * [S](/stocks/stock-quote-list/s)
  * [T](/stocks/stock-quote-list/t)
  * [U](/stocks/stock-quote-list/u)
  * [V](/stocks/stock-quote-list/v)
  * [W](/stocks/stock-quote-list/w)
  * [X](/stocks/stock-quote-list/x)
  * [Y](/stocks/stock-quote-list/y)
  * [Z](/stocks/stock-quote-list/z)

  * [1](/stocks/stock-quote-list/1)
  * [2](/stocks/stock-quote-list/2)
  * [3](/stocks/stock-quote-list/3)
  * [4](/stocks/stock-quote-list/4)
  * [5](/stocks/stock-quote-list/5)
  * [6](/stocks/stock-quote-list/6)
  * [7](/stocks/stock-quote-list/7)
  * [8](/stocks/stock-quote-list/8)
  * [9](/stocks/stock-quote-list/9)

##### Browse Mutual Funds

  * [A](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/a)
  * [B](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/b)
  * [C](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/c)
  * [D](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/d)
  * [E](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/e)
  * [F](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/f)
  * [G](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/g)
  * [H](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/h)
  * [I](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/i)
  * [J](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/j)
  * [K](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/k)
  * [L](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/l)
  * [M](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/m)
  * [N](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/n)
  * [O](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/o)
  * [P](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/p)
  * [Q](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/q)
  * [R](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/r)
  * [S](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/s)
  * [T](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/t)
  * [U](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/u)
  * [V](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/v)
  * [W](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/w)
  * [X](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/x)
  * [Y](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/y)
  * [Z](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/z)

##### Index Stocks

  * [ ACC ](/company/acc-6.html)
  * [ Adani Ports ](/company/adany-ports-21281.html)
  * [ Ambuja Cem. ](/company/ambuja-chem-218.html)
  * [ Asian Paints ](/company/asian-paints-34.html)
  * [ Aurobindo Pharma ](/company/aurobindo-pharma-4666.html)
  * [ Axis Bank ](/company/axis-bank-5554.html)
  * [ B H E L ](/company/b-h-e-l-2306.html)
  * [ B P C L ](/company/b-p-c-l-2290.html)
  * [ Bajaj Auto ](/company/bajaj-auto-28074.html)
  * [ Bank of Baroda ](/company/bank-of-baroda-5456.html)
  * [ Bharti Airtel ](/company/bharti-airtel-15542.html)
  * [ Bharti Infra. ](/company/bharti-infra-40279.html)
  * [ Bosch ](/company/bosch-378.html)
  * [ Cipla ](/company/cairn-india-114.html)
  * [ Coal India ](/company/coal-india-12019.html)
  * [ Dr Reddy's Labs ](/company/dr-reddy-s-labs-815.html)
  * [ Eicher Motors ](/company/eicher-motors-151.html)
  * [ GAIL (India) ](/company/gail-india-12350.html)
  * [ Grasim Inds ](/company/grasim-inds-227.html)
  * [ H D F C ](/company/h-d-f-c-230.html)
  * [ HCL Technologies ](/company/hcl-technologies-5656.html)
  * [ HDFC Bank ](/company/hdfc-bank-4987.html)
  * [ Hero Motocorp ](/company/hero-motocorp-237.html)
  * [ Hind. Unilever ](/company/hind-unilever-255.html)
  * [ Hindalco Inds. ](/company/hindalco-inds-252.html)
  * [ ICICI Bank ](/company/icici-bank-5418.html)
  * [ Idea Cellular ](/company/idea-cellular-23040.html)
  * [ IndusInd Bank ](/company/indusInd-bank-5531.html)
  * [ Infosys ](/company/infosys-2806.html)
  * [ ITC ](/company/itc-301.html)
  * [ Kotak Mah. Bank ](/company/kotak-mah-bank-2330.html)
  * [ Larsen &amp; Toubro ](/company/larsen-toubro-348.html)
  * [ Lupin ](/company/lupin-3026.html)
  * [ M &amp; M ](/company/m-m-365.html)
  * [ Maruri Suzuki ](/company/maruti-suzuki-5496.html)
  * [ NTPC ](/company/ntpc-12001.html)
  * [ O N G C ](/company/o-n-g-c-6068.html)
  * [ Power Grid Corpn ](/company/power-grid-corpn-5455.html)
  * [ Reliance Inds. ](/company/reliance-inds-476.html)
  * [ St Bk of India ](/company/st-bk-of-india-5654.html)
  * [ Sun Pharma. Inds. ](/company/sun-pharma-inds-4325.html)
  * [ Tata Motors ](/company/tata-motors-560.html)
  * [ Tata Motors-DVR ](/company/tata-motors-dvr-36014.html)
  * [ Tata Power Co. ](/company/tata-power-co-554.html)
  * [ Tata Steel ](/company/tata-steel-566.html)
  * [ TCS ](/company/tcs-5400.html)
  * [ Tech Mahindra ](/company/tech-mahindra-17215.html)
  * [ UltraTech Cement Ltd ](/company/ultratech-cem-24951.html)
  * [ Wipro ](/company/wipro-614.html)
  * [ Yes Bank ](/company/yes-bank-25267.html)
  * [ Zee Entertainment ](/company/zee-entertainmen-3126.html)

![Business Standard](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/bs-footer-logo.jpg)

Copyrights © 2015 Business Standard Private Ltd. All rights reserved.

  *     * #### From BS Website

    * [Home](/home-page)
    * [Companies](/companies)
    * [Markets](/markets)
    * [Opinion](/opinion)
    * [Politics](/politics)
    * [Technology](/technology)
    * [Specials](/specials)
    * [Personal Finance](/pf)
    * [Budget](/budget2016)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper)
    * [RBI Policy](/category/specials-rbi-policy-10931.htm)
    * [General News](/general-news)
    * [General Videos](/general-video/list)
    * [General Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/general-list)
    * [Events](/category/sponsored-content-events-15802.htm)
    * [Authors](/author)
  *     * #### About us

    * [About Us](/about-us)
    * [Code of Conduct](/code-of-conduct)
    * [Terms &amp; Conditions](/terms-conditions)
    * [Disclaimer](/disclaimer)
    * [Investor Communication](/investor-communication.html)

    * #### Support &amp; Contact

    * [Partner with Us](/partner-with-us)
    * [Careers](/careers)
    * [Advertise with Us](/advertise-with-us)
    * [Contact Us](/contact-us)
    * [Feedback](/feedback)
    * [Browser Support](/browser-support)
    * [Sitemap](/sitemap.html)
  *     * #### Subscribe

    * [E-Paper](http://epaper.business-standard.com/bsepaper/login.php)
    * [BS Magazines](http://books.business-standard.com/magazine.php)
    * [Portfolio Tracker](/portfolio)

    * #### BS Products

    * [Smart Investor](http://smartinvestor.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Hindi](http://hindi.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Motoring](http://www.bsmotoring.com/index2.php)
    * [BS Books](http://books.business-standard.com/)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [iPhone](/iphone)
    * [iPad](/ipad)
    * [android](/android)
    * [wap](/wap)
    * [BS Fund Cafe 2016](/category/events-business-standard-fund-cafe-2016-1750301.htm)

  * #### Elections 2016

  * [Assam Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-assam-assembly-2016-11711.htm)
  * [Kerala Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-kerala-assembly-2016-11714.htm)
  * [Tamil Nadu Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-tamil-nadu-assembly-2016-11712.htm)
  * [West Bengal Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-west-bengal-assembly-2016-11713.htm)

#### Connect with BS

  * [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/bsindia "Find Us on Facebook" )
  * [Google+](https://plus.google.com/+businessstandard/posts "Follow on Google Plus" )
  * [Linkedin](https://in.linkedin.com/company/business-standard "Connect on Linkedin" )
  * [Twitter](https://twitter.com/bsindia "Follow Us on Twitter" )
  * [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/user/BusinessStandardLtd "Subscribe Us on Youtube" )
  * [RSS](/rss-feeds/listing/ "RSS Feed" )

![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images
/business-standard-logo.png)

**Upgrade To Premium Services**  
  
---  
  
Welcome User

Business Standard is happy to inform you of the launch of "Business Standard
Premium Services"

As a premium subscriber you get an across device unfettered access to a range
of services which include:

  * Access Exclusive content - articles, features & opinion pieces
  * Weekly Industry/Genre specific newsletters - Choose multiple industries/genres
  * Access to 17 plus years of content archives
  * Set Stock price alerts for your portfolio and watch list and get them delivered to your e-mail box
  * End of day news alerts on 5 companies (via email)
  * **NEW**: Get seamless access to WSJ.com at a great price. No additional sign-up required.

  
---  
  
![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images
/business-standard-logo.png)

**Premium Services **

**In Partnership with ![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/fis logo 130x58.png)**  
  
---  
  
  
  
**Dear Guest,**  
  
  
  
Welcome to the premium services of Business Standard brought to you courtesy
FIS.  
Kindly visit the [Manage my subscription page](/subscription-cart/manage) to
discover the benefits of this programme.  
  
Enjoy Reading!  
Team Business Standard

  
---  
  
![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=8021726&cv=2.0&cj=1)

EvaluationofIntegratedPestandDiseaseManagementModuleforShallotsinTamilNadu,
India:aFarmer™sParticipatoryApproach
D.Dinakaran,
1G.Gajendran,
1S.Mohankumar,
2G.Karthikeyan,
3S.Thiruvudainambi,
1E.I.Jonathan,
3R.Samiyappan,
2D.G.Pfeiffer,
4E.G.Rajotte,
5G.W.Norton,
6S.Miller,
7andR.Muniappan
81AnbilDharmalingamAgriculturalCollegeandResearchInstitute,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,DindigulRd.,NavalurKuttapattu,Tiruchirappalli-620009,
India.2CentreforPlantMolecularBiologyandBiotechnology,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
3CentreforPlantProtectionStudies,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
4Correspondingauthor:DepartmentofEntomology,117DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061(e-mail:dgpfeiff@vt.edu).
5DepartmentofEntomology,501ASI,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity,UniversityPark,PA16802.
6DepartmentofAgriculturalandAppliedEconomics,250DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
7DepartmentofPlantPathology,1680MadisonAve.,TheOhioStateUniversity–OARDC,Wooster,OH44691.
8IPM–CRSP,OfficeinInternationalResearch,EducationandDevelopment,526Prices’sForkRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
J.Integ.PestMngmt.4(2):2013;DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/IPM12019
ABSTRACT.EffortsmadetoevaluatetheIntegratedPestManagement(IPM)moduleforshallotsthroughFarmer’sParticipatory
ApproachinTamilNadu,India,arediscussed.TheshallotIPMmodulewithspecialemphasisonnonchemicalmanagement
componentsviz.,healthyseedbulbselection,seedtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,soilapplicationofbio-pesticidesandbio-inputs,

growingofbarriercrops,installationofstickytrapsandpheromonetraps,sprayapplicationofbio-pesticides,andneed-based

applicationofsyntheticpesticideswereevaluatedinlargefieldsinfarmers’holdingsinsixlocationsduring2009–2012.Inallthe

locations,theIPMfieldsregisteredreducedincidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(5.99
thrips/plant),leafminer(
Liriomyzasp.)(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(3.51%damage),basalrot
(Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.Hansen)(3.50%incidence)andpurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)
(24.50PercentDiseaseIndex)comparedwithfarmer’sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceofonionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),

leafminer(19.65%damage),tobaccocutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch(51.6Percent

DiseaseIndex).TheIPMfieldsregisteredahighermeanbulbyieldof13.81t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:3.05comparedwith

10.69t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:2.47infarmer’sapproach.Fielddays,exhibitions,anddemonstrationswereorganizedin

allthelocationstopopularizetheshallotIPMmoduleamongthegrowers.
KeyWords:
shallot,shallotpests,shallotdiseases,onion,onionpests
Onion,Alliumcepa
L.(Alliaceae)isoneofthemostimportant
commercialvegetablecropsinIndia,cultivatedinanareaof
756,000ha.Twomaintypesofonions,bulbonion(
Alliumcepa
varietycepa)andshallotormultiplieronion(
Alliumcepa
varietyaggregatum),arecultivatedinIndiawiththeproductionandpro-

ductivityof12.16milliontonnesand16.10tonnes/ha,respectively

(www.nhb.gov.in).InthestateofTamilNadu,thesouthernmost

partofIndia,onioniscultivatedinanareaof30,255hawitha

productionof286,000tonnes.Theshallotisthemostcommontype

ofonioncultivatedinTamilNaduanditiscommonlypropagated

throughbulbs.TheaverageproductivityofonioninTamilNaduis

9.45tonnes/ha(www.tn.gov.in).Insectpests,especiallyonion

thrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(Fig.1),leafminer(
Liriomyza
sp.)(Fig.
2),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(Fig.3),anddiseases,
especiallypurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)(Fig.4)and
basalrot(
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.
Hansen)(Fig.5),limittheproductionandproductivityofonionin
thestate.
T.tabaci
isconsideredapestofnationalimportancein
India,causinganannualyieldlossof10Œ15%inonionthrough

feedingdamage(Fig.6)andindirectlythroughpredisposingonion

plantstopurpleblotch(Fig.7)andtransmittingIrisYellowSpot

Virus(IYSV)disease(Guptaetal.1994,Zenetal.2008).Repeated

applicationofinsecticideshasresultedinresistancedevelopment

inonionthripstoinsecticides(AlstonandDrost2008).Leafminers

havebecomeseriouspestson
Alliumsp.inmanypartsoftheworld,
causingeconomicdamagetoonionandothervegetables(Chenet

al.2003).Leafminerproblemsareexacerbatedbyuseofsynthetic

pesticidesthatkillnaturalenemies(Aridaetal.2002b).Yellow

stickytrapshavebeenreportedtobeeffectiveintrappingonion
thrips(Choetal.1995,DemirelandCranshaw2005)andleafminer
adults(Tryonetal.1980,Unmoleetal.1999).Tobaccocutworm,

apolyphagouspest,causesseveredefoliationinonion(Atwaland

Dhaliwal2005).Neemextractsandneemoilhavebeenfoundtobe

effectiveincheckingonionpests(Sonataetal.2005,Sharmaand

Seth2005,Mishraetal.2007,KrishnaKumaretal.2008).
Basalrotisaneconomicallyimportantdiseaseofonionand
generallyoccurswhensoiltemperaturesareverywarm(optimum
29°C).Diseaseincidenceincreaseswhereonionisgrowncontin-

uously.Theearlysymptomsinthefieldareyellowingofleavesand

tipdieback.Asthediseaseprogresses,thewholeplantmaycol-

lapseand,iftheplantispulled,itoftencomesoutwithoutanyroots

attachedbecausetheyhavedecayed.Ifinfectionoccurslateinthe

season,thesymptomsmaynotshowupuntiltheonionsarein

storagebecauseoflatentinfections(Brayford1996).Yieldlosses

of25Œ35%to
Fusariumbasalrothavebeenreportedinonion(Lacy
andRoberts1982).Purpleblotchofonionisaproblemparticularly

duringcoolermonthsasthediseasespreadsrapidlyunderfavor-

ableclimaticconditionscausingseriousyieldlosses(Guptaetal.

1981).Thehumidclimatewithtemperaturesrangingfrom18to

30°Candrelativehumidityof80Œ90%favorsthediseasedevel-

opment.Smallbrownspotswithpurplishcentersarecharacteristic

ofthisdisease.Underfavorableconditions,thespotsformintooval

lesionsthathaveapurplishtintwithconcentricrings.Thelesions

maygirdleleaves/stalkandcausedrying.Theinfectedplantsfail

todevelopbulbs.Olderleavesaremoresusceptibletothedisease.

Thelossinyieldresultingfromthisdiseaseisaround20Œ25%and

theseverityofpurpleblotchinonionisalwayshigherinfieldswith
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from EvaluationofIntegratedPestandDiseaseManagementModuleforShallotsinTamilNadu,
India:aFarmer™sParticipatoryApproach
D.Dinakaran,
1G.Gajendran,
1S.Mohankumar,
2G.Karthikeyan,
3S.Thiruvudainambi,
1E.I.Jonathan,
3R.Samiyappan,
2D.G.Pfeiffer,
4E.G.Rajotte,
5G.W.Norton,
6S.Miller,
7andR.Muniappan
81AnbilDharmalingamAgriculturalCollegeandResearchInstitute,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,DindigulRd.,NavalurKuttapattu,Tiruchirappalli-620009,
India.2CentreforPlantMolecularBiologyandBiotechnology,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
3CentreforPlantProtectionStudies,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
4Correspondingauthor:DepartmentofEntomology,117DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061(e-mail:dgpfeiff@vt.edu).
5DepartmentofEntomology,501ASI,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity,UniversityPark,PA16802.
6DepartmentofAgriculturalandAppliedEconomics,250DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
7DepartmentofPlantPathology,1680MadisonAve.,TheOhioStateUniversity–OARDC,Wooster,OH44691.
8IPM–CRSP,OfficeinInternationalResearch,EducationandDevelopment,526Prices’sForkRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
J.Integ.PestMngmt.4(2):2013;DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/IPM12019
ABSTRACT.EffortsmadetoevaluatetheIntegratedPestManagement(IPM)moduleforshallotsthroughFarmer’sParticipatory
ApproachinTamilNadu,India,arediscussed.TheshallotIPMmodulewithspecialemphasisonnonchemicalmanagement
componentsviz.,healthyseedbulbselection,seedtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,soilapplicationofbio-pesticidesandbio-inputs,

growingofbarriercrops,installationofstickytrapsandpheromonetraps,sprayapplicationofbio-pesticides,andneed-based

applicationofsyntheticpesticideswereevaluatedinlargefieldsinfarmers’holdingsinsixlocationsduring2009–2012.Inallthe

locations,theIPMfieldsregisteredreducedincidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(5.99
thrips/plant),leafminer(
Liriomyzasp.)(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(3.51%damage),basalrot
(Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.Hansen)(3.50%incidence)andpurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)
(24.50PercentDiseaseIndex)comparedwithfarmer’sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceofonionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),

leafminer(19.65%damage),tobaccocutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch(51.6Percent

DiseaseIndex).TheIPMfieldsregisteredahighermeanbulbyieldof13.81t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:3.05comparedwith

10.69t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:2.47infarmer’sapproach.Fielddays,exhibitions,anddemonstrationswereorganizedin

allthelocationstopopularizetheshallotIPMmoduleamongthegrowers.
KeyWords:
shallot,shallotpests,shallotdiseases,onion,onionpests
Onion,Alliumcepa
L.(Alliaceae)isoneofthemostimportant
commercialvegetablecropsinIndia,cultivatedinanareaof
756,000ha.Twomaintypesofonions,bulbonion(
Alliumcepa
varietycepa)andshallotormultiplieronion(
Alliumcepa
varietyaggregatum),arecultivatedinIndiawiththeproductionandpro-

ductivityof12.16milliontonnesand16.10tonnes/ha,respectively

(www.nhb.gov.in).InthestateofTamilNadu,thesouthernmost

partofIndia,onioniscultivatedinanareaof30,255hawitha

productionof286,000tonnes.Theshallotisthemostcommontype

ofonioncultivatedinTamilNaduanditiscommonlypropagated

throughbulbs.TheaverageproductivityofonioninTamilNaduis

9.45tonnes/ha(www.tn.gov.in).Insectpests,especiallyonion

thrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(Fig.1),leafminer(
Liriomyza
sp.)(Fig.
2),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(Fig.3),anddiseases,
especiallypurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)(Fig.4)and
basalrot(
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.
Hansen)(Fig.5),limittheproductionandproductivityofonionin
thestate.
T.tabaci
isconsideredapestofnationalimportancein
India,causinganannualyieldlossof10Œ15%inonionthrough

feedingdamage(Fig.6)andindirectlythroughpredisposingonion

plantstopurpleblotch(Fig.7)andtransmittingIrisYellowSpot

Virus(IYSV)disease(Guptaetal.1994,Zenetal.2008).Repeated

applicationofinsecticideshasresultedinresistancedevelopment

inonionthripstoinsecticides(AlstonandDrost2008).Leafminers

havebecomeseriouspestson
Alliumsp.inmanypartsoftheworld,
causingeconomicdamagetoonionandothervegetables(Chenet

al.2003).Leafminerproblemsareexacerbatedbyuseofsynthetic

pesticidesthatkillnaturalenemies(Aridaetal.2002b).Yellow

stickytrapshavebeenreportedtobeeffectiveintrappingonion
thrips(Choetal.1995,DemirelandCranshaw2005)andleafminer
adults(Tryonetal.1980,Unmoleetal.1999).Tobaccocutworm,

apolyphagouspest,causesseveredefoliationinonion(Atwaland

Dhaliwal2005).Neemextractsandneemoilhavebeenfoundtobe

effectiveincheckingonionpests(Sonataetal.2005,Sharmaand

Seth2005,Mishraetal.2007,KrishnaKumaretal.2008).
Basalrotisaneconomicallyimportantdiseaseofonionand
generallyoccurswhensoiltemperaturesareverywarm(optimum
29°C).Diseaseincidenceincreaseswhereonionisgrowncontin-

uously.Theearlysymptomsinthefieldareyellowingofleavesand

tipdieback.Asthediseaseprogresses,thewholeplantmaycol-

lapseand,iftheplantispulled,itoftencomesoutwithoutanyroots

attachedbecausetheyhavedecayed.Ifinfectionoccurslateinthe

season,thesymptomsmaynotshowupuntiltheonionsarein

storagebecauseoflatentinfections(Brayford1996).Yieldlosses

of25Œ35%to
Fusariumbasalrothavebeenreportedinonion(Lacy
andRoberts1982).Purpleblotchofonionisaproblemparticularly

duringcoolermonthsasthediseasespreadsrapidlyunderfavor-

ableclimaticconditionscausingseriousyieldlosses(Guptaetal.

1981).Thehumidclimatewithtemperaturesrangingfrom18to

30°Candrelativehumidityof80Œ90%favorsthediseasedevel-

opment.Smallbrownspotswithpurplishcentersarecharacteristic

ofthisdisease.Underfavorableconditions,thespotsformintooval

lesionsthathaveapurplishtintwithconcentricrings.Thelesions

maygirdleleaves/stalkandcausedrying.Theinfectedplantsfail

todevelopbulbs.Olderleavesaremoresusceptibletothedisease.

Thelossinyieldresultingfromthisdiseaseisaround20Œ25%and

theseverityofpurpleblotchinonionisalwayshigherinfieldswith
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from onionthrips(ThindandJhooty1982,YasodhaandNatarajan
2008).Oniongrowersinthestategenerallyrelyonsyntheticpesticides
likeprofenophos,acephate,imidacloprid,fipronil,chlorpyrifos,

cypermethrinchlorpyrifos,mancozeb,carbendazim,car-
bendazimmancozeb,wettablesulfur,andsoforth,formanage-
mentofpestsanddiseasesandthefrequencyofapplicationsranges

fromsixtoninespraysdependingupontheseasonandpestsand
diseasesload(Selvamuthukumar2011).Repeatedsyntheticpesti-

cidesapplicationsoftenresultinresistancedevelopment,resur-

gence,andnaturalenemydestructionbesidesenvironmentaldeg-

radation(DentandWalton1997
,Thankietal.2003).Oneofthe
challengesofdevelopingandimplementinganIPMmoduleisto

successfullybalancethegoalsofreducingpesticideusewhile

maintainingthecropqualitydemandedbythefarmerandthe

market.Inresponsetothethreatofseveredamageandeconomic

lossbypestsanddiseasesinshallot,theU.S.AgencyforInterna-

tionalDevelopment(USAID)fundedprojectIPMŒCRSP(Inte-

gratedPestManagementŒCollaborativeResearchSupportPro-

gram),inwhichTamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity(TNAU),

Indiaisacollaborator,hasdevelopedanintegratedpestmanage-
Fig.1.
Onionthripsinjurytoshallotleaves.
Fig.2.
Leafminerinjuryinshallotleaf.
Fig.3.
Tobaccocutwormdamageinshallot.
Fig.4.
Lesioninshallotleafcausedbypurpleblotch.
Fig.5.
Symptomofbasalrotinfectioninshallot.
Fig.6.
Onionthripsinfestedshallotfieldpresentingburntup
appearance.2JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENTVOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from ment(IPM)moduleforshallot(Gajendranetal.2011).TheIPM
moduleisbio-intensivewithemphasisonnonchemicalcompo-

nents.TheshallotIPMmodulewastestverifiedinfarmers™hold-

ingsinlargefieldsinsixlocationsfrom2009to2012andcom-

paredwithfarmers™practice,wheretotalrelianceonsynthetic

insecticides(sixtoninespraysindifferentlocations)wasobserved

inmajoroniongrowingtractsofTamilNadu.
StudyMethodsandApproach
ImplementationofIPMModule.
SixlocationsinthestateofTamil
NaduinsouthernIndia,whereshallotisthemajorcropwereselected

fortheprogramandtheIPMmodulewasevaluatedin
Kharif(Juneto
September)and
Rabi(OctobertoFebruary)seasons.
Location1:Irur,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2009Œ2010)
Location2:Ayyalur,DindigulDistrict(
Kharif2010)Location3:Alathur,Perambalurdistrict(
Kharif2010)Location4:Sengattupatti,TrichyDistrict(
Rabi2010Œ2011)
Location5:Sathiramanai,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2010Œ2011)
Location6:Narasingapuram,TrichyDistrict(
Rabi2011Œ2012)Ateachlocation,evaluationoftheIPMmodulewascarriedoutin
areaof0.4haandcomparedwithfarmer™spracticeinanareaof0.4

ha.ThecommonlygrownshallotcultivaroftheregionCo4wasused

inallthelocations.
TheIPMŒCRSPprogramworkingwithTamilNaduAgricultural
University(TNAU)hasdevelopedIPMmoduletosolvepestand

diseaseproblemsinshallotwithemphasisonbio-pesticidesandbe-

havioralapproaches.TheIPMŒCRSP-TNAUprogramhasstrongly

promotedthetransferofshallotIPMmoduletogrowersbyaggressive

technologytransferprograms.ThedetailsofIPMmoduleandtech-

nologytransferactivitiesarediscussed.Selectionofexperimental

fieldsinoniongrowingregionswasmadewiththeassistanceof

extensionofficialsoftheStateDepartmentofAgriculture/Horticul-

tureintherespectiveareas.ThedetailsofIPMmodulearediscussed

below.BulbSelectionandTreatment.
Selectionofhealthybulbsforplant-
ing(Fig.8)isimportantasthebasalrotcausedby
Fusariumsp.isboth
afieldandstoragefungus(CoskuntunaandOzer2008).Basalrot

incidenceisoneofthemajorcausesforpoorfieldstandasitcauses

rottingoftheplantintheearlystageofthecropgrowth.Healthy

(diseasefree)seedbulbsweremanuallyselectedfromstoredseed

onionbeforeplanting.
Pseudomonasfluorescens
andTrichodermaviride
haveprovento
beeffectivebio-controlagentsagainstbasalrotpathogen(Malathiand

Mohan2011).Theseantagonisticorganismsinducesystemicresis-

tanceinplantsandinadditionpromoteplantgrowth(Rajendranand

Ranganathan1996,BennettandWhipps2008,Bennettetal.2009).

Onionbulbtreatmentwith
P.fluorescens
(Pf1TNAUformulation)(5
g/kg)T.viride
(TNAUformulation)(5g/kg)in20mlofwater/kg
ofseedbulbswasappliedbeforeplanting.Thebio-suspensionwas
sprinkledovertheseedbulbsandmanuallyturnedforuniformcoating

ofthebio-pesticidesovertheseedbulbs.
SoilAmendmentsWithBio-Products.
Fieldapplicationofbio-
pesticidesreducessoil-bornepathogenslike
Fusariumandpromotes
buildupofantagonisticorganismsandpromotesplantgrowth(Cham-

pawatandSharma2003,AltintasandBal2008,CoskuntunaandOzer

2008).Applicationofbio-fertilizersandArbuscularMycorrhizalFun-

gus(AMF)promotesplantgrowthandconfersresistancetobiotic

stress(SrivastavaandTiwari2003).AMFhasbeenshowntoincrease

resistancetoroot-infectingpathogenicfungilike
Fusariumspp.and
rootinvadingnematodes(Lindermann1994).Neemcakeapplication

hasbeeneffectiveincheckingpestsanddiseasebesidespromoting

plantgrowth(RukmaniandMariappan1990,ChakrabartiandSen

1991).Consideringthebeneficialaspectsofthebio-inputs,thefol-

lowingbio-inputsviz.
P.fluorescens
(TNAUformulation)(1.25kg/
ha),T.viride
(TNAUformulation)(1.25kg/ha),Azophos(TNAU
formulationofAzospirillum
Phosphobacteria)(4kg/ha),AMF
(TNAUformulation)(12.5kg/ha),andNeemcake(commercialgrade

neemseedoilcake)(250kg/ha)werethoroughlymixedandapplied

uniformlyinthefieldbeforeplanting(Fig.9).
MaizeasBarrierCrop.
Growingmaizeasabarriercrophasbeen
effectiveinpreventingtheentryofonionthripstoonionfieldsandin

theconservationofcoccinellidpopulations(SrinivasandLawande

2002).Inthecurrentstudy,TNAUmaizehybridCoH(M)5wassown

closelyintworowsallalongthefieldborderatthetimeofshallot

planting.PheromoneandStickyTraps.
Sexpheromonetrapsareusefultools
formonitoring,masstrapping,andtimingofinsecticidalapplicationin

themanagementofcutworms,
Spodopteraspp.inonion(Aridaetal.
2002a).Sleevetypepheromonetraps(suppliedbyM/sGrenicon

AgrotechPrivateLtd.,Chennai,India)baitedwithpheromonelureof
Fig.7.
Combinedinfectionofpurpleblotchandonionthrips.
Fig.8.
Womenfarmersengagedinselectionofdiseasefreeseed
bulbsforplanting.
Fig.9.
Mixingofbio-inputsforsoilapplicationbeforeplanting.
JUNE2013DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS3
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from S.litura
wereinstalledintheIPMfieldsat12/haandthelureswere
replacedevery2wk.Yellowstickytraps(Highwayyellowshade
polyethylenefilmof30cmheightand90cmlengthsmearedwith

clearcastoroil)wereinstalledat12/hajustabovethecropcanopy

usingwoodenpolesatbothends(Fig.10).Theoilwaschangedeach

weektoensureadequatetrapping.
FoliarApplicationofBio-Pesticides.
Normallyonionthripsinfest
shallots4wkafterplanting.Afoliarsprayof
P.fluorescens
(5g/lit)
andBeauveriabassiana
(10g/lit)wasappliedon30thdayofplanting
forthemanagementofonionthripsintheearlystage.
B.bassiana
aloneandincombinationwithotherbio-pesticideshasbeenreported

tobeeffectiveagainstonionthrips(Thungrabeabetal.2006,Almaz-

raawietal.2009).Acommercialformulationofneemcontaining1%

(10,000ppm)azadirachtinwassprayedat2ml/literon40thdayafter

plantingforthemanagementofinsectpests.
FoliarApplicationofSyntheticPesticides.
Syntheticpesticideap-
plicationwascarriedoutinIPMfieldsonlyonneedbasisand

insecticides(profenophos50EC[2ml/liter],triazophos50EC[2

ml/liter],anddimethoate30EC[(2ml/liter])weresprayedforthe

managementofonionthrips,leafminer,andcutworms.Thesesyn-

theticinsecticideswereappliedwhenonionthripspopulation,

leafminer,andtobaccocutwormdamagecrossed10thrips/plant,10%

leafdamage,and5%infestedplants,respectively.Forthemanage-

mentofpurpleblotchdisease,sprayapplicationoftebuconazole250

EC(1.5ml/liter)ormancozeb75WP(2.0g/liter)wasmadeafterthe

initialappearanceofthediseaseasitspreadsquicklyandcauses

severedamagewithinashortperiod.
SamplingandObservations.
Fivemicroplotsof20m
2werecho-
senineachtreatmentforrecordingobservationsonpestsand

diseasesinallthesixlocations.Ineachmicroplot,onionthrips

populationwascountedfrom10randomlyselectedplants.

Leafminerdamagewasassessedbycountingtotalnumberofleaves

andinfestedleavesfrom10randomlyselectedplants.Tobacco

cutwormdamagewasassessedbycountingthetotalnumberof

plantsineachmicroplotanddamagedplants.Incidenceofbasalrot

wasassessedbycountingthetotalnumberofplantsineach

microplotandinfectedplantsandexpressedaspercentincidence.

Purpleblotchincidencewasassessedfrom10randomlyselected

plantsineachmicroplotbyfollowinga0Œ9ratingscaleandthe

severitywasexpressedasPercentDiseaseIndex(PDI).
Farmer™sApproachComparison
Theshallotgrowersintheprojectareagenerallyusedsynthetic
insecticidesandfungicidesforpestanddiseasemanagement.The

numberofsprayswithsyntheticpesticidesinfarmer™spracticeranged

from6to9indifferentlocationsdependingupontheseverityofpests

anddiseasesindifferentseasons.Noneofthefarmersintheexperi-

mentallocationadoptedhealthybulbselection,bulbtreatment,bio-

pesticide/bio-fertilizerapplication,stickytrap,andpheromonetrap

installation.Generalagronomicpracticeslikeplowing,planting,manuring,
irrigation,weeding,andsoforth,werecarriedoutaspertherecom-

mendationsoftheCropProductionTechniquesofHorticulturalCrops

2004inbothIPMandfarmers™approachfields(Anonymous2004).

Theexpenditureincurredinraisingbarriercropofmaizeandthe

incomerealizedthroughmaizewastakenintoaccountincalculating

costbenefitratioofIPMfields.
DataAnalysis.
Theexperimentaldataweresubjectedtoanalysisof
variance(ANOVA)fordeterminingthelevelofsignificance(Gomez

andGomez1984).Ineachlocation,themicroplotsservedasreplicates

foreachtreatmentandobservationsineachlocationwerecompared

statisticallybypaired
t-test.Themeanvaluesofpestanddisease
incidence,bulbyieldandeconomicsofeachlocationweretreatedas

replicatesandtheoverallmeanofsixlocationswerecomparedsta-

tisticallybyANNOVA.
MajorFindings
PestsandDiseases
LocationI.Irur,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2009–2010
).
Theresults
revealedthattheIPMfieldregisteredminimumpopulationofonion
thrips(10.81
0.49thrips/plant),reducedleafinjurybyleafminer
(13.200.60%damage)andtobaccocutworm(5.48
0.31%damage)comparedwithahigherthripspopulation(14.85
0.60thrips/plant),leafminer(23.61
1.05%damage),andtobaccocut-
worm(9.13
0.68%damage)infestationinfarmer™spractice.Inci-
denceofbasalrotwasfoundtobelowerinIPMfields(1.8
0.34%)ascomparedwith5.6
0.40%incidenceinfarmer™spractice.Oc-
currenceofpurpleblotchwasnoticedinboththefieldsandthe

severitywasexpressedinPDIanditwaslesser(20.0
1.13PDI)in
IPMfieldwhencomparedwithfarmer™sapproachwhichrecordeda

diseaseseverityof45.6
1.59PDI(Table1).
LocationII.Ayyalur,DindigulDistrict(
Kharif2010
).
Onionthrips,
tobaccocutworm,andbasalrotalonewerenoticedintheexperimental

fieldsandallthesepestsanddiseaseswereregisteredatreducedlevel

inIPMfieldthaninfarmer™sapproach.Thepercentreductionofonion

thripspopulation,tobaccocutwormdamage,andbasalrotincidencein

IPMfieldoverfarmer™sapproachwas65.7,39.4,and52.0,respec-

tively(Table1).
LocationIII.Alathur,PerambalurDistrict(
Kharif2010
).
Themean
onionthripspopulationinIPMfieldwas4.85
0.37/plantcompared
with10.22
0.48/plantinfarmer™sapproachandthebasalrot
incidencewaslesserinIPMfield(4.80
0.60%)ascomparedwith
12.300.92%infarmer™sapproach.Incidenceofpurpleblotch,
tobaccocutworm,andleafminerwasnotobservedintheexperimental

fieldsduringtheseason(Table1).
LocationIV.Sengattupatti,TiruchirappalliDistrict(
Rabi2010–11
).
ThemeanonionthripspopulationinIPMfieldwas8.30
0.44/plantcomparedwith15.95
0.98/plantinfarmer™sapproach.
Leafminerinfestationwasobservedtoanextentof13.76
0.53%damageinIPMfieldcomparedwith19.80
0.86%infarmer™s
approach.Cutwormdamagewas3.92
0.35%inIPMfieldanditwas
6.850.57%infarmer™sapproach.Incidenceofbasalrotwasnoticed
toanextentof2.29
0.47%inIPMfieldasagainst5.04
0.67%infarmer™sapproach.Theseverityofpurpleblotchwas24.4
1.68PDIinIPMfieldasagainst46.7
1.15PDIinfarmer™sapproach
(Table1).
LocationV.Sathiramanai,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2010–11
).
AdoptionofIPMmoduleregisteredlessermeanonionthripspopu-

lation(1.71
0.31thrips/plant),leafminerinjury(13.57
0.67%damage)andcutworminjury(4.83
0.54%damage)comparedwith
farmer™sapproachwith4.33
0.43thrips/plant,18.88
0.93%leafminerinjury,and7.35
0.54%cutwormdamage.Theincidence
ofbasalrotwaslesserinIPMfieldwith1.71
0.32%ascompared
with4.33
0.48%infarmer™sapproach.Theseverityofpurpleblotch
inIPMfieldwas31.1
0.82PDIasagainst57.8
1.07PDIin
farmer™sapproach(Table1).
Fig.10.
Installationofyellowstickytrapsinshallotfield.
4JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENTVOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from LocationVI.Narasingapuram,TiruchirappalliDistrict(
Rabi2011–12).
AtNarasingapuramlocation,adoptionofIPMmodule
reducedtheincidenceofshallotpestsanddiseasesasinotherloca-
tionsandthepercentreductionoverfarmer™sapproachrangedfrom

39.7to61.5%.InIPMfield,thepopulationofonionthripsandinjury

byleafminersandcutwormswerereducedby51.8,39.7,and61.5%,

respectively.Similarly,theseverityofbasalrotandpurpleblotchwere

alsoreducedstatisticallybyadoptionofIPMmodule,registering51.7

and60.1%,respectively(Table1).
Theoverallmeanofallthesixlocationsalsorevealedthereduced
incidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(5.99

thrips/plant),leafminer(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(3.51%dam-

age),basalrot(3.50%incidence),andpurpleblotch(24.50PDI)inIPM

fieldcomparedwithfarmer™sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceof

onionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),leafminer(19.65%damage),tobacco

cutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch

(51.6PDI)(Fig.11).
BulbYieldandEconomics.
Itwasevidentfromtheresultsofallthe
sixlocationsthattheadoptionofshallotIPMmodulesignificantly

enhancedthebulbyieldtothetuneof20.2(locationII)to47.0

(locationI)percentoverfarmer™sapproach.InlocationI,IPMfield

registeredsignificantlyhigherbulbyield(15.62
0.90t/ha)thanthe
farmer™sapproach(12.13
0.84t/ha).AdoptionofIPMmodule
enhancedtheshallotbulbyield(12.50
0.46t/ha)asagainstfarmer™s
approach(10.40
0.68t/ha)inlocationIIwithacostbenefitratioof
1:1.73.InlocationIII,higherbulbyieldof13.60
0.77t/hawas
recordedinIPMfieldthatissignificantlysuperioroverfarmer™s
approachregistering11.20
0.60t/ha.Thesametrendcontinuedin
locationsIV,V,andVIalsoregisteringhigherbulbyieldsof14.58
0.92t/ha,12.90
0.70t/ha,and13.64
0.70t/ha,respectivelyin
IPMfieldscomparedwithfarmer™sapproachthatrecordedsignifi-

cantlyreducedyields(Table2).Thecostbenefitratioinallthe

locationsrangedfrom1:1.73(locationII)to1:6.36(locationIV)in

IPMfieldscomparedwith1:1.41(locationI)to1:5.42(locationIV)

infarmer™sapproach(Fig.12).Thewidevariationinthecostbenefit

ratioofIPMfieldandfarmer™sapproachbetweenseasonsisbecause

ofhighfluctuationinthemarketpriceofshallot.
Analysis(ANOVA)ofmeanvaluesofsixlocationsrevealed
thattheadoptionofIPMmoduleinshallotwassignificantly

superioroverfarmer™spracticeinreducingtheincidenceofonion

thripspopulation(5.99
1.37thrips/plantvs.11.58
1.78thrips/plant),leaf-miner(12.59
0.93%damagevs.19.65
2.20%damage),tobaccocutworm(3.51
0.82%damagevs.
6.221.22%damage),basalrot(3.5
0.88%vs.8.14
1.82%),andpurpleblotch(24.5
2.39PDIvs.51.6
3.15PDI)(Table
1).TheIPMfieldsregisteredsignificantlyahighermeanbulbyield

of13.81
0.47t/hawithacostbenefitratioof1:3.05
0.78comparedwith10.69
0.43t/hawithacostbenefitratioof
1:2.470.68infarmer™sapproach(Table2).
ShallotIPMModuleDissemination
Normally,theoniongrowersofTamilNadugettechnicalad-
visoryservicesfromthelocalextensionfunctionariesoftheState

DepartmentofAgriculture/HorticultureandKrishiVigyanKend-
Table1.EvaluationofShallotIPMmodulethroughfarmer™sparticipatoryapproach
TreatmentThripspopulation
(no./plant)Leafminerdamage
(%)Tobaccocutworm
damage(%)
Basalrotincidence
(%)Purpleblotch(PDI)
LocationI(
Rabi
2009–2010)IPMfield10.81
0.4913.20
0.605.48
0.311.80
0.3420.0
1.13Farmer’sapproach14.85
0.6023.61
1.059.13
0.685.60
0.4045.6
1.59Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach27.244.140.067.956.1
LocationII(
Kharif2010)IPMfield
3.360.27—0.970.187.250.91—Farmer’sapproach
9.800.53—1.600.1915.10
1.28—Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach65.739.452.0LocationIII(
Kharif2010)IPMfield
4.850.37——4.800.60—Farmer’sapproach
10.220.48——12.300.92—Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach52.561.0LocationIV(
Rabi2010–2011)IPMfield
8.300.4413.76
0.533.92
0.352.290.4724.4
1.68Farmer’sapproach
15.950.9819.80
0.866.85
0.575.040.6746.7
1.15Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach48.030.542.854.647.8LocationV(
Rabi2010–2011)IPMfield
1.710.3113.57
0.674.83
0.541.710.3231.1
0.82Farmer’sapproach
4.330.4318.88
0.937.35
0.544.330.4857.8
1.07Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach60.528.134.360.546.2LocationVI(
Rabi2011–2012)IPMfield
6.920.719.83
0.672.37
0.283.120.5422.4
0.96Farmer’sapproach
14.350.6016.29
0.936.15
0.486.460.6156.1
1.06Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach51.839.761.551.760.1Overallmean
IPMfield
5.991.3712.59
0.93(20.72)3.51
0.82(10.43)3.50
0.88(10.91)24.5
2.39(30.93)
Farmer’sapproach
11.581.7819.65
2.20(26.26)6.22
1.22(14.02)8.14
1.82(16.61)51.6
3.15(45.90)
Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach48.335.943.657.052.5S.Ed.
0.810.800.640.632.05C.D.(
P0.05)2.082.551.771.626.51Figuresinparenthesesare
arcsinetransformedvalues.
S.Ed.,standarderrorofdifference;C.D.,criticaldifferenceat5%levelamongthevaluesgiveninparentheses.
JUNE2013
DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS
5 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from ras(KVK)(FarmScienceCenters)oftheStateAgriculturalUni-
versity.However,theseareinadequateconsideringthecomplexity

ofthepestsanddiseasesproblemsandexpertiseavailableinthe

extensiondepartments.Hence,theIPMŒCRSPteamoftheTNAU

joinedhandswiththeextensionofficials,KVKandAllIndiaRadio

(AIM)forspeedydisseminationoftheIPMmoduleamongthe

shallotgrowers.
Methoddemonstrationsonseedbulbtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,
soilapplicationofbio-inputsandneemcake,installationofyellow

stickytrapsandpheromonetrapsinthefieldwereorganizedinallthe

locationstodisseminatetheeco-friendlytechnologiesofshallotIPM

tofarmingcommunity.
Inallthesixlocations,fielddaysandexhibitionswereorganized
atthetimeofharvestingtopopularizebio-intensiveIPMmodule

amongtheshallotgrowers.Farmers-Scientistsinteractivesessionand
feedback(sharingofexperiences)bythefarmerswholaidout

demonstrationtrialswerealsoorganized.
Topopularizethebio-inputsviz.,
T.viride
,
P.fluorescens
,pher-
omonetrapsandyellowstickytrapsamongthegrowers,freedistri-

butionoftheseinputswasmadetogrowerswherethedemonstration

trialswereconducted(Figs.13and14).Besides,pamphletsonshallot

IPMmodulewaspreparedinlocallanguageanddistributedtogrowers

fordisseminationoftechnology.DisseminationofshallotIPMmodule

throughpublicationinlocalnewspapers,journalsweremadetopop-

ularizethetechnologyamongtheshallotgrowers.
AFarmSchoolprogramonradiowasorganizedunderthe
USAIDIPMŒCRSPprograminvolvingtheDirectorateofExten-

sionEducation,TNAU,andAllIndiaRadio,Tiruchirappalli.In

total,1,447vegetablegrowersfromalloverTamilNadustate

registeredandbenefiteddirectly.Besides,thebroadcastcovered
Fig.11.
ImpactofshallotIPMModuleonpestanddiseaseincidence(meanofsixlocations).
Fig.12.
ImpactofshallotIPMModuleonbulbyieldandeconomics(meanofsixlocations).
Table2.EffectofShallotIPMmoduleonbulbyieldandcostbenefitratio
TreatmentLocationI(
Rabi2009–2010)
LocationII
(Kharif2010)LocationIII
(Kharif2010)LocationIV(
Rabi2010–2011)
LocationV(
Rabi2010–2011)
LocationVI(
Rabi2011–2012)Overallmean
Bulbyield(t/ha)
IPMfield
15.620.9012.50
0.4613.60
0.7714.58
0.9212.90
0.7013.64
0.7013.81
0.47Farmer’sapproach
12.130.8410.40
0.6811.20
0.6011.28
0.729.87
0.689.28
0.6210.69
0.43Percentincreaseoverfarmer’s
approach28.820.221.4
29.330.747.029.2S.Ed.
0.33C.D.(
P0.05)0.85Costbenefitratio
IPMfield
1:1.841:1.731:1.961:6.36
1:4.401:1.981:3.05
0.78Farmer’sapproach
1:1.411:1.481:1.611:5.42
1:3.501:1.391:2.47
0.68S.Ed.,standarderrorofdifference;C.D.,criticaldifferenceat5%levelamongthevaluesgiveninparentheses.
6JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENT
VOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from nearly70%oftheareainTamilNadustate,benefittingthousands
ofoniongrowers.InJanuary2012,alargegrowermeetingwas

heldattheTiruchirappallicampusofTNAUtocelebratethe

successoftheAIMradioseriesandtheproductionofashallotIPM
manual,supportedbyIPMŒCRSPatTNAU.Approximately600

TamilNadufarmersattended,andsomeoftheparticipatingfarm-

ersgavetestimonialsontheimportanceoftheextensioneffortsto

theirfarming(Figs.15Œ17).Inaddition,variousTNAUbooths

furtherillustratedIPMŒCRSPmethods,includingsomecreatedby

TNAUundergraduatestudents(Fig.18).
AdoptionofShallotIPMApproach.
Assessmentofimpactofshallot
IPMmoduledemonstrationsanddisseminationactivitiesonthepro-
ductionandproductivityofshallotintheareaswheretheseactivities

werecarriedoutrevealedthatthefarmershaverealizedreduced

productioncost(2.60%),increasedbulbproduction(19.28%),and

highereconomicreturns(23.89%)overtheconventionalfarmer™s

approachwherethetotalreliancewasonsyntheticchemicalpesti-

cides.ThelackofanIPMstrategyinshallotproductionwasovercome

throughourapproachundertheIPMŒCRSPprogramandithasbeen

popularizedinmajorshallotgrowingareasofTamilNadu,India.

Thoughsomeoftheprogressivefarmersadoptedtheentirepackage,
Fig.13.
Distributionofyellowstickytrapstoshallotgrowersduring
FieldDay.
Fig.14.
Distributionofbio-pesticidestoshallotgrowersduringField
Day.Fig.15.
WelcomesignforarrivingparticipantsinTamilNadufarmer
meetingcelebratingIPMradioseriesproducedbyAllIndiaRadio
(AIM),TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity(TNAU),andtheSouth

AsianregionalprojectoftheIPM–CRSP.
Fig.16.
FarmerprovidingcommentsonthevalueofIPMlessons
providedoverAIR.
Fig.17.
TamilNadufarmersgatheredforIPMcelebrationat
TNAU–Trichy.Fig.18.
TNAUundergraduatesatdioramaillustratingseveralIPM
toolsdevelopedbyIPM–CRSPinSouthAsia(pheromonetrapping,

yellowstickytraps,maizebordercrops,andsoilbiopesticides).
JUNE2013DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS7
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from fewmajorcomponentsoftheshallotIPMmoduleviz.,selectionof
healthyseedbulbs,bulbtreatmentwith
Pseudomonasfluorescens
andTrichodermaviride,
soilapplicationof
PseudomonasandTricho-dermaalongwithneemcakeandsprayapplicationofazadirachtinare
adoptedbymostoftheshallotgrowersoftheregion.Theother

componentslikegrowingofmaizeasbordercropandinstallationof

trapsarebeingadoptedonasmallerscale.However,effortsarebeing

madetopopularizethesetechnologiesinshallotgrowingareasunder

theIPMŒCRSPprogram.
WeconcludethatamajorconstraintinshallotproductioninTamil
Nadu,India,hasbeenalackofIPMstrategiestoreplacepesticide-

relianttacticsandthefailuretoadopttheIPMstrategiesdeveloped.

TheIPMŒCRSPshallotprogramhasbeenabletoovercomebothof

theseconstraintsbydevelopingapackageofIPMmoduleandsuc-

cessfullytransferringittoonionfarmers.TheIPMmoduleforshallot

developedbyIndianandUnitedStatesscientistsunderUSAIDfunded

IPMŒCRSPprojectwasevaluatedthroughFarmer™sParticipatory

ApproachinTamilNadu,India.TheshallotIPMmoduleevaluatedin

largefields(farmers™holdings)insixlocationsduring2009Œ2012

registeredreducedincidenceofthemajorpestsanddisease,especially

onionthrips,leafminer,tobaccocutworm,basalrot,andpurpleblotch

coupledwithhigherbulbyieldandcostbenefitratiocomparedwith

farmers™approach.WithaviewtopopularizetheshallotIPMmodule

amongtheshallotgrowers,IPMFieldDays,exhibitions,andmethod

demonstrationswereorganizedinallthelocations.Womenfarmers,

whoareengagedinshallotcultivationactivelyparticipatedandinter-

actedwiththescientists.PopularizationtheshallotIPMmodulewas

alsomadethroughnewsmagazines,AllIndiaRadioandtechnical

bulletins.AcknowledgmentsThispublicationwasmadepossiblethroughsupportprovidedby
theAgricultureOfficewithintheBureauforEconomicGrowth,Ag-
riculture,andTrade(EGAT)oftheU.S.AgencyforInternational

Development,underthetermsoftheIPMŒCRSP(AwardEPP-A-00-

04-00016-00).Theopinionsexpressedhereinarethoseoftheauthor

anddonotnecessarilyreflecttheviewsoftheU.S.Agencyfor

InternationalDevelopment.
ReferencesCited
Almazraawi,M.S.,A.Al-Abbadi,M.A.Shatnawi,andM.Ateyyat.2009.
Effectofapplicationmethodontheinteractionbetween
Beauveriabassiana
andneemtreeextractwhencombinedfor
Thripstabaci
(Thysanoptera:Thripidae)control.JournalofFood,AgricultureandEnvironment7:869Œ
873.Alston,D.G.,andD.Drost.2008.Onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
),PestFact
Sheet,UtahStateUniversityExtensionandUtahPestDiagnosticLabora-

tory.Altintas,S.,andU.Bal.2008.Effectsofthecommercialproductbasedon
Trichodermaharzianum
onplant,bulbandyieldcharacteristicsofonion.
ScientiaHorticulturae116:219Œ222.
Anonymous.2004.Cropproductiontechniquesofhorticulturalcrops2004.
DirectorateofHorticultureandPlantationCrops,ChennaiandTamilNadu

AgriculturalUniversity,Coimbatore,TamilNadu,India.
Arida,G.S.,B.S.Punzal,C.C.RavinaJr.,V.P.Gapud,E.G.Rajotte,and
N.S.Talekar.2002a.Sexpheromonesinpestmanagementmonitoringadult

densitiesof
Spodopteralitura
(F.)S.exigua
(Hu¨bner)(Lepidoptera:Noc-
tuidae)inriceonioncroppingsystems.PhilRiceTechnicalBulletin6:

36Œ40.
Arida,G.S.,C.C.RavinaJr.,B.S.Punzal,E.G.Rajotte,andN.S.Talekar.
2002b.Populationdynamicsoftheonionleaf-miner,
Liriomyzatrifolii
(Burgess)insprayedandunsprayedfields.Posterpresentedatthe35thPest

ManagementCouncilofthePhilippinesConference,May8Œ10,Davao

City,Philippines.
Atwal,A.S.,andG.S.Dhaliwal.2005.AgriculturalpestsofSouthAsiaand
theirManagement:pestsofvegetables.KalyaniPublishers,NewDelhi,

India.Bennett,A.J.,A.Mead,andJ.M.Whipps.2009.Performanceofcarrotand
onionseedprimedwithbeneficialmicroorganismsinglasshouseandfield

trials.BiologicalControl51:417Œ426.
Bennett,A.J.,andJ.M.Whipps.2008.Beneficialmicroorganismsurvivalon
seed,rootsandinrhizospheresoilfollowingapplicationtoseedduringdrum
priming.BiologicalControl44:349Œ361.
Brayford,D.1996.
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepae.Mycopathologia133:
39Œ40.
Chakrabarti,S.K.,andB.Sen.1991.Suppressionof
Fusariumwiltofmusk-
melon.IndianPhytopathology44:476Œ479.
Champawat,R.S.,andR.S.Sharma.2003.Integratedmanagementofnursery
diseasesinbrinjal,chilli,cabbageandonion.JournalofMycologyandPlant

Pathology33:290Œ291.
Chen,X.X.,X.Y.Lang.,Z.H.Xu.,J.H.He,andY.Ma.2003.Theoccurrence
ofleafminersandtheirparasitoidsonvegetablesandweedsinHangzhou

area,SoutheastChina.BiologicalControl48:515Œ527.
Cho,K.,C.S.Eckel,J.F.Walgenbach,andG.G.Kennedy.1995.Comparison
ofcoloredstickytrapsformonitoringthripspopulations(Thysanoptera:
Thripidae)instakedtomatofields.JournalofEntomologyandScience30:

176Œ190.
Coskuntuna,A.,andN.Ozer.2008.Biologicalcontrolofonionbasalrot
diseaseusing
Trichodermaharzianum
andinductionofantifungalcom-
poundsinonionsetfollowingseedtreatment.CropProtection27:

330Œ336.
Demirel,N.,andW.Cranshaw.2005.Attractionofcolourtrapsto
Thripsspecies(Thysanoptera:Thripidae)onbrassicacropsinColorado.Pakistan

JournalofBiologyandScience8:1247Œ1249.
Dent,D.R.,andM.P.Walton.1997.Methodsinecologicalandagricultural
entomology.CABIPublishing,Wallingford,UK.
Gajendran,G.,D.Dinakaran,S.Mohankumar,G.Karthikeyan,andV.Jayabal.
2011.Developmentandpopularizationofintegratedpestanddiseaseman-

agementmoduleinonion,pp.238Œ239.
InSouvenirand(abstr.)ofNational
SymposiumonﬁAlliums:CurrentScenarioandEmergingTrendsﬂorgan-

isedbyIndianSocietyofAlliumsandDirectorateofOnionandGarlic,

Pune,India,12Œ14March2011.
Gomez,K.A.,andA.A.Gomez.1984.Statisticalproceduresforagricultural
research(2nded.).Wiley,Inc.NewYork,NY.
Gupta,R.P.,V.B.Pandey,D.K.Srivastava,andL.Singh.1981.Bioassayof
fungicidesagainst
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Neergcausingpurpleblotchof
onion.Pesticides75:27Œ28.
Gupta,R.P.,K.J.Srivastava,U.B.Pandey,andD.J.Midmore.1994.Diseases
andinsectpestsofonioninIndia.ActaHorticulture358:265Œ372.
Sonata,K.,S.Aurelija,T.Vytautas,A.Algirdas,Z.Algimantas.2005.The
effectivenessofinsecticideNeemazalT/S1%E.C.forprotectionof

commonChinaAster(
Callistephuschinensis
(L.)seedlingsagainst
onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
(Lindeman).RuralDevelopment-Technology
ofProgressiveFarming:TechnicalandTechnologicalSolutions,55:

27Œ28.KrishnaKumar,N.K.,P.N.Krishnamoorthy,C.M.Kalleshwaraswamy,and
H.R.Ranganath.2008.Managementofthrips(
Thripstabaci
Lindeman)on
organicallyraisedroseonion.PestManagementinHorticulturalEcosystems

14:128Œ132.
Lacy,M.L.,andD.L.Roberts.1982.Yieldsofonionentriesinmidwestern
organicsoilsinfestedwith
Fusariumoxysporum
f.spcepaeandPyreno-chaetaterrestris.
PlantDisease66:1003Œ1006.
Lindermann,R.G.1994.RoleofVAMfungiinbiocontrol,pp.1Œ25.
InF.L.
PflegerandR.G.Lindermann(eds.),MycorrhizaeandPlantHealth.APS

Press,St.Paul,MN.
Malathi,S.,andS.Mohan.2011.Evaluationofbiocontrolagentsandorganic
amendmentsagainstonionbasalrotcausedby
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepae.MadrasAgricultureJournal98:382Œ385.
Mishra,D.K.,GopeshPathak,R.S.Tailor,andAlokDeshwal.2007.On-farm
trial:anapproachformanagementofthripsinonion.IndianRes.J.Ext.Ed.

7:66Œ67.
Rajendran,K.,andK.Ranganathan.1996.Biologicalcontrolofonionbasalrot
(F.oxysporumf.sp.cepae
)bycombinedapplicationoffungalandbacterial

antagonists.JournalofBiologicalControl10:97Œ102.
Rukmani,S.,andV.Mariappan.1990.Influenceoforganicamendmentswith
Trichodermaviride
onthecontrolofrootrotofblackgram.PlantDisease
Research5:244.
Selvamuthukumar,G.2011.Studiesonseasonalincidenceandmanagementof
onionpests.M.Sc.(Ag.)thesis.TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,Co-

imbatore,India.
Sharma,A.K.,andR.K.Seth.2005.Combinedeffectofgammaradiationand
azadirachtinonthegrowthanddevelopmentof
Spodopteralitura
F.Current
Science89:1027Œ1031.
Srinivas,P.S.,andK.E.Lawande.2002.Barriercropping:anewmethodfor
themanagementofthripsinonion.
InProceedingsofInternationalConfer-
enceonVegetables
.Nov11Œ14,2002,Bangalore,India.
Srivastava,K.J.,andB.K.Tiwari.2003.Nurserydiseasemanagementin
8JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENT
VOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from onionwithbiocontrolandplantproducts.NationalHorticulturalResearch
andDevelopmentFoundationNewsletter23:5Œ8.
Thanki,K.V.,G.P.Patel,andJ.R.Patel.2003.Populationdynamicsof
Spodopteralitura
oncastor,
Ricinuscommunis
.IndianJournalofEntomol-
ogy65:347Œ350.
Thind,T.S.,andJ.S.Jhooty.1982.Associationofthripswithpurpleblotch
infectionononionplantscausedby
Alternariaporri.
IndianPhytopathology
35:696Œ698.
Thungrabeab,M.,P.Blaser,andC.Sengonca.2006.Possibilitiesforbiocontrol
oftheonionthrips,
Thripstabaci
Lindeman(Thysanoptera,Thripidae)using
differententomopathogenicfungifromThailand.JournalofPlantDisease
andProtection13:181Œ187.
Tryon,E.H.Jr.,S.L.Poe,andH.L.Cromroy.1980.Dispersalofvegetable
leaf-minerontotransplantproductionrange.FloridaEntomology63:292Œ
296.Unmole,L.,D.Abeeluck,andR.Seetohul.1999.Yellowstickytrapsasa
monitoringtoolforeffectivecontrolofleafminersinonion.Foodand

AgriculturalResearchCouncil.Reduit,Mauritius.
Yasodha,P.,andN.Natarajan.2008.Managementofonionandgarlicthrips
(Thripstabaci
)andflowerthrips(
Frankliniellaoccidentalis).
RashtriyaKrishi.3:30Œ31.
Zen,S.,M.Okuda,S.Fuji,andT.Iwanami.2008.Theseasonaloccurrenceof
viruliferousThripstabaci
andtheincidenceofIrisyellowspotvirusdisease
onlisianthus.JournalofPlantPathology90:511Œ515.
Received16September2012;accepted6June2013.
JUNE2013
DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS
9 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from [![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo
/logo-wb-header-en.svg) ](http://www.worldbank.org/) [![The World Bank Working
for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-
en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)

Working for a World Free of Poverty

![menubartoggle](/content/dam/wbr/img/mobile-menu-lines.png)

  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
  * [__Connect](http://live.worldbank.org/connect)

  * [English__](http://www.worldbank.org) [EN__](http://www.worldbank.org)
    * [Español](http://www.bancomundial.org/)
    * [Français](http://www.banquemondiale.org/)
    * [عربي](http://www.albankaldawli.org/)
    * [Русский](http://www.worldbank.org/eca/russian/)
    * [中文](http://www.worldbank.org.cn/Chinese/)
    * [View All »](http://www.worldbank.org/languages)

[ ![#](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs/img/icon-search-black.png)
](javascript:submit_search_form\(\); "Search" )

[Search](javascript:submit_search_form_mobile\(\); "Search" )

  * [![Home](/content/dam/wbr/logo/home-icon.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [Home](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [About](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [Data](http://data.worldbank.org/)
  * [Research](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [Learning](http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/)
  * [News](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Projects & Operations](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Publications](http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/reference)
  * [Countries](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [Topics](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

[![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo
/logo-wb-header-en.svg) ](http://www.worldbank.org/) [![The World Bank Working
for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-
en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)

Working for a World Free of Poverty

  1. [News](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,pagePK:34382~piPK:34439~theSitePK:4607,00.html)

FEATURE STORY

# Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Bodies Restoration
Management Project

July 21, 2014

* * *

  * [ __Email ](javascript:MM_openBrWindow\(\);)
  * [ __Print ](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-irrigated-agriculture-modernization-and-water-bodies-restoration-management-project.print)

  * __Tweet
  * __Share
  * __Share
  *     * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-linkin32x32.svg)](javascript:share\('http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url='\);)

[LinkedIn
](javascript:share\('http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url='\);
"LinkedIn" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-digg.svg)](javascript:share\('http://digg.com/submit?url='\);)

[Digg ](javascript:share\('http://digg.com/submit?url='\); "Digg" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-renren.svg)](javascript:share\('http://share.renren.com/share/buttonshare.do?link='\);)

[人人网
](javascript:share\('http://share.renren.com/share/buttonshare.do?link='\);
"人人网" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-stumbleupon.svg)](javascript:share\('http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url='\);)

[Stumble Upon](javascript:share\('http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url='\);
"Stumble Upon" )

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-delicious.svg)](javascript:share\('http://delicious.com/save?url='\);)

[Delicious](javascript:share\('http://delicious.com/save?url='\); "Delicious"
)

    * [ ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sina-32x32.svg)](javascript:share\('http://v.t.sina.com.cn/share/share.php?title='\);)

[新浪微博](javascript:share\('http://v.t.sina.com.cn/share/share.php?title='\);
"新浪微博" )

![Image](/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature
Story/sar/india/IN_Tamil_Nadu_Agriculture.jpg)

World Bank

* * *

**Approval Date:** 23 January 2007  
**Closing Date:** 30 September 2014  
**Commitment Amount:** $485 million  
**Percentage Disbursed:** 76% (As of 30 June 2014)

**_Context:_**

Problems associated with water availability in Tamil Nadu have become more
pronounced due to increasing demands from industry and households, as well as
a long-term uptrend in the use of water for agriculture. The Tamil Nadu
Irrigated Agriculture Modernization  and Water Bodies Restoration  and
Management Project supports the government of Tamil Nadu’s goal of improving
irrigation systems across the state to increase agricultural and livestock
productivity, and create market linkages for farmers. The government also
recognizes the need to develop and implement a comprehensive institutional
framework for efficient water management.

**_Project Development Objective:_**

The objective is for selected stakeholders (i.e. those in the watershed area
covered by the project) to increase irrigated agriculture productivity in a
sustainable water resources management framework. The project components are:

  * **_Irrigation Systems_****_ _****_Modernization_****_ _****_in_****_ a Sub-basin Framework: _**focuses on improvements in local water body’s irrigation and larger irrigation systems.
  * **_Agricultural_****_ _****_Intensification_****_ _****_and_****_ _****_Diversification:_****_ _**focuses on improvements in crop, livestock, and fisheries varieties and management practices, as well as improvements in marketing linkages for farmers.
  * **_Institutional_****_ _****_Modernization_****_ _****_for_****_ _****_Irrigated_****_ _****_Agriculture:_****_ _**focuses on capacity building for the Water Resources Organization and the establishment and operation of Water Users Associations.
  * **_Water_****_ Resources Management: _**focuses on establishing and operating a State Water Resources Management Agency as an apex body for water management issues for the state.

**_Location/Scale_****:**

The project covers 600,000 hectares in 63 selected sub-basins across the
state.  **__**

**_Status_****:**

  * The project is progressing well toward achieving its targets. Crop yields have increased anywhere from 18 to 32 percent, in line with the project target (25-30 percent).
  * Farmers have diversified from traditional crops such as paddy to higher-value horticultural crops (30 percent area increase).
  * New micro-irrigation systems, which cover over 37,000 hectares, have already been introduced against an end-of-project target of 40,000 ha.
  * Farmers’ incomes from agriculture have increased by roughly 35 percent, progressing well toward the intended target of 50 percent.
  * Planned targets for improved irrigation systems are being achieved in terms of area coverage, and the quality of these interventions has been above that prevailing outside the project.
  * The planned number of Water Users Associations has been established. A model for invigorating the WUAs through a broader program of community water budgeting has been tested successfully and is being expanded.
  * The project has successfully tested a model to integrate the activities of various line departments at the local level based on Single Window Information Centers, and this model is also being scaled up.
  * The State Water Resources Management Agency is established and serves as a hub for the state to deal more effectively with its water management issues.

* * *

* * *

* * *

###### RELATED

WORLD BANK

  * [ Status Report: World Bank Engagement in Tamil Nadu](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/status-report-world-bank-engagement-in-tamil-nadu)
  * [ Empowerment and Poverty Reduction Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-empowerment-and-poverty-reduction-project)
  * [ Health System Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-health-system-project)
  * [ Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project](/en/news/feature/2014/07/21/tamil-nadu-and-puducherry-coastal-disaster-risk-reduction-project)

EXTERNAL

  * [Dreams and Questions](http://blogs.worldbank.org/endpovertyinsouthasia/dreams-and-questions)
  * [World Bank India on Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/WorldBankIndia)
  * [World Bank India on Twitter](https://twitter.com/WBG_India)

* * *

###### MULTIMEDIA

![Image](/content/dam/Worldbank/Highlights%20&%20Features/sar/India/in-
slideshow-tamilnadu-field-visit.jpg) [__Video](/en/news/video/2014/06/19
/slideshow-impressions-from-a-field-visit-in-tamil-nadu)

VIDEO

##### [Slideshow: Impressions From a Field Visit in Tamil
Nadu](/en/news/video/2014/06/19/slideshow-impressions-from-a-field-visit-in-
tamil-nadu)

* * *

  * [India](/en/country/india)
  * [South Asia](/en/region/sar)
  * [Agriculture](/en/topic/agriculture)

* * *

###### LATEST NEWS

  * FEATURE STORY

##### [Unheard Voices: Men and Youth in Thailand’s Conflict-Affected Deep
South](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2016/09/21/men-and-youth-in-
thailands-conflict-affected-deep-south)

Sep 21, 2016

  * OPINION

##### [Uganda: Another Success Story Ten Years From
Now?](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/09/20/uganda-another-
success-story-ten-years-from-now)

Sep 20, 2016

  * PRESS RELEASE

##### [Agriculture Drives Uganda’s Success in Reducing
Poverty](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/09/20
/agriculture-drives-ugandas-success-in-reducing-poverty)

Sep 20, 2016

* * *

###### BLOGS

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/picture-10414-1422477561.jpg)

##### [ SDGs Made with Code: Giving young women the power to change the world
](http://blogs.worldbank.org/ic4d/sdgs-made-code-giving-young-women-power-
change-world)

Mariana Dahan

Sep 20, 2016

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/picture-11783-1474405220.jpg)

##### [ Moving from informal to formal sector and what it means for
policymakers ](http://blogs.worldbank.org/jobs/moving-informal-formal-sector-
and-what-it-means-policymakers)

Monami Dasgupta

Sep 20, 2016

  * ![Image](http://blogs.worldbank.org/files/styles/thumbnail/public/pictures/260.jpeg)

##### [ The world’s top 100 economies: 31 countries; 69 corporations
](http://blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/world-s-top-100-economies-31-countries-69-corporations)

Duncan Green

Sep 20, 2016

* * *

###### Newsletters

[View All newsletters
»](http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:23566264~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376~theSitePK:4607,00.html)

  * FOLLOW US

  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-youtube.svg)](https://www.youtube.com/user/WorldBank)
  * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-flickr.svg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank)

Newsletter

* * *

  * RESOURCES
  * [Civil Society](http://www.worldbank.org/civilsociety)
  * [Consultations](http://consultations.worldbank.org/)
  * [Government](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [Client Connection](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [Parliamentarians](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/parliamentarians)
  * [Access to Information](http://www.worldbank.org/en/access-to-information)
  * [Financing & Risk Management](http://treasury.worldbank.org/bdm/htm/index.html)
  * [Businesses](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [Corporate Procurement](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [Operational Procurement](http://www.worldbank.org/projectprocurement)
  * [Investors](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [World Bank Bonds](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [Job Seekers](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [Journalists](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Students](http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/youth)

  * [ABOUT](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [History](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/history)
  * [Organization](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership)
  * [Public Outreach](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/speakers-bureau)
  * [Events](http://www.worldbank.org/en/events)
  * [Jobs](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [Annual Reports](http://www.worldbank.org/annualreport)
  * World Bank Group Accountability 
  * [Compliance Advisor Ombudsman](http://www.cao-ombudsman.org/)
  * [Grievance Redress Service](http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service)
  * [Independent Evaluation Group](http://ieg.worldbank.org/)
  * [Inspection Panel](http://ewebapps.worldbank.org/apps/ip/Pages/Home.aspx)
  * [Integrity Vice Presidency](http://www.worldbank.org/integrity)
  * [Policies and Procedures](http://policies.worldbank.org/)

  * [Data](http://data.worldbank.org)
  * [DataBank](http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx)
  * [Data Catalog](http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog)
  * [Microdata](http://microdata.worldbank.org/)
  * [Data Publications & Products](http://data.worldbank.org/products)
  * [APIs for Developers](http://data.worldbank.org/developers)
  * [RESEARCH](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [Search Research](http://search.worldbank.org/research)
  * [Tools & Tables](http://econ.worldbank.org/datasets)
  * [LEARNING](http://www.worldbank.org/learning)
  * [Global Development Learning Network](http://gdln.org)
  * [Statistical Capacity Building](http://www.worldbank.org/en/data/statistical-capacity-building)
  * [Scholarships & Fellowships](http://www.worldbank.org/scholarships)

  * [NEWS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [Search News](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/all)
  * [Blogs](http://blogs.worldbank.org/)
  * [Multimedia](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/multimedia)
  * [Media Briefing Center](http://media.worldbank.org)
  * [Media Contacts](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/contacts)
  * [PROJECTS & OPERATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Search Projects](http://search.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [Products & Services](http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services)
  * [Country Lending](http://www.worldbank.org/countrylending)
  * [Results](http://www.worldbank.org/results)
  * [PUBLICATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/reference/?lang=en)
  * [Documents & Reports](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/home)
  * [Archives](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/archives)
  * [Libraries](http://jolis.worldbankimflib.org/external.htm)

  * [COUNTRIES](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [TOPICS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

* * *

    * FOLLOW US

    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-fb.svg)](http://www.facebook.com/worldbank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-twitter.svg)](http://www.twitter.com/worldbank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-linkedln.svg)](http://www.linkedin.com/company/the-world-bank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-instagram.svg)](https://instagram.com/worldbank/)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-youtube.svg)](https://www.youtube.com/user/WorldBank)
    * [![Image](/content/dam/wbr/social-icon/sm-icons-flickr.svg)](https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank)

    * Newsletter

    * More ways to get to us
    * [Sign Up for Email Newsletters](http://newsletters.worldbank.org/newsletters/list.htm)
    * [World Bank Apps](http://apps.worldbank.org/)
    * [World Bank Live](http://live.worldbank.org/)

  * RESOURCES
  * [ Civil Society](http://www.worldbank.org/civilsociety)
  * [ Consultations](http://consultations.worldbank.org/)
  * [ Government](https://clientconnection.worldbank.org/servlet/main?menuPK=234032&pagePK=232663&piPK=234033)
  * [ Businesses](http://www.worldbank.org/corporateprocurement)
  * [ Investors](http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/index.html)
  * [ Job Seekers](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs)
  * [ Journalists](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [ Students](http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/youth)

  * [ ABOUT](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about)
  * [ Data](http://data.worldbank.org)
  * [ RESEARCH](http://www.worldbank.org/en/research)
  * [ LEARNING](http://www.worldbank.org/learning)
  * [ NEWS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/news)
  * [ PROJECTS & OPERATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/projects)
  * [ PUBLICATIONS](http://www.worldbank.org/reference/?lang=en)
  * [ COUNTRIES](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country)
  * [ TOPICS](http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic)

  * [ ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [IBRD](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" )    [IDA](http://www.worldbank.org/ida "International Development Association" )    [IFC](http://www.ifc.org/ "International Finance Corporation" )    [MIGA](http://www.miga.org/ "Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" )    [ICSID](http://icsid.worldbank.org/ "International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes" )

  * [ ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)](http://www.worldbank.org/)
  * [IBRD](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" )    [IDA](http://www.worldbank.org/ida "International Development Association" )    [IFC](http://www.ifc.org/ "International Finance Corporation" )    [MIGA](http://www.miga.org/ "Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" )    [ICSID](http://icsid.worldbank.org/ "International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes" )

[Legal](http://www.worldbank.org/legalinfo) | [Access to
Information](http://www.worldbank.org/wbaccess) |
[Jobs](http://www.worldbank.org/jobs) |
[Contact](http://www.worldbank.org/contacts)

©  The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.

[REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/integrity-
vice-presidency/report-an-allegation)

[REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION](http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/unit/integrity-
vice-presidency/report-an-allegation)

Skip to content

  * [Journals](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journals)
  * [Books](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/bookbshsrw)

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

  * [Shopping cart](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74 "Shopping cart" )
  * __ Sign in
  * [ Help ](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=browse_open_doc.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fbrowse_open_doc.htm|SkinName=svs_SD "Help \(Opens new window\)" )

[ScienceDirect](/)

  * Sign in

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

    * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
    * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

  * [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

  * [Journals](/science/journals)
  * [Books](/science/bookbshsrw)
  * [Register](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user)

* Sign in
* [Help](/science?_ob=HelpURL&_file=browse_open_doc.htm&_btn=Y "Help" )

close

### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username

Password

Remember me

[Forgotten username or
password?](/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

### Sign in via your institution

  * [OpenAthens login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042 "Log in using OpenAthens" )
  * [Other institution login](/science/externallogin "Other institution login" )

[ __Order Document
](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=DocumentDeliveryURL&_method=deliver&_orig=article&_rdoc=1&_eid=1-s2.0-S0169515097000042&_cid=271138&_issn=01695150&_pii=S0169515097000042&_zone=toolbar&md5=1986c52b30844d372dbcec957dd4d98c
"Order Document" )

Loading...

__ Export __

You have selected 1 citation for export.

[Help](http://help.sciencedirect.com/flare/sdhelp_Left.htm#CSHID=art_export.htm|StartTopic=Content%2Fart_export.htm|SkinName=svs_SD
"Help \(Opens new window\)" )

### Direct export

Save to Mendeley

[Save to RefWorks](/sdfe/export/S0169515097000042/refworks-tagged-format)

### Export file

#### Format

RIS (for EndNote, ReferenceManager, ProCite)

BibTeX

Text

#### Content

Citation Only

Citation and Abstract

Export

[Advanced search](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/search)

Close

This document does not have an outline.

JavaScript is disabled on your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all
the features on this page.

[Agricultural Economics](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150 "Go
to Agricultural Economics on ScienceDirect" )

[Volume 16, Issue
3](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3 "Go to table of
contents for this volume/issue" ), August 1997, Pages 185-192

[ ![Cover image](http://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/S01695150.gif)
](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01695150/16/3)

# Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: An analysis based on farm
size and ecological zone

Author links open the overlay panel. Numbers correspond to the affiliation
list which can be exposed by using the show more link.

Opens overlay Bedassa Tadesse ∗, a,
[JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG](mailto:JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG "author email" ),
Opens overlay S. Krishnamoorthy b

aDepartment of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Jimma College of
Agriculture, P.O. Box 307, Jimma, Ethiopia, IndiabDepartment of Agricultural
Economics, Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003, India

Accepted 18 March 1997, Available online 23 December 1997

Show more

### Choose an option to locate/access this article:

Check if you have access through your login credentials or your institution.

[Check
access](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169515097000042?_fmt=full
"Click to see if you have full text access" )

[ ![Get Full Text
Elsewhere](http://www.sciencedirect.com/scidirimg/gw_rtn_ihub.gif)
](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169515097000042?showall=true)

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

[doi:10.1016/S0169-5150(97)00004-2](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5150\(97\)00004-2
"Persistent link using digital object identifier" )

[Get rights and
content](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?publisherName=ELS&orderBeanReset=true&contentID=S0169515097000042
"Copyright Clearance Center \(new window\)" )

* * *

## Abstract

Despite the wider application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture,
little has been done on the investigation of intra and interecological
variations, size differences and their interactions. However, ecological
issues have paramount implications for the low-input sustainable agricultural
production. Furthermore, due to the various causes of efficiency, the age-old
size-based debate on efficiency differences is not yet resolved. The present
study examines the level of technical efficiency across ecological zones and
farm size groups in paddy farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
The study showed that 90% of the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms
in the state is due to differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power
and fertilisers have significant influence on the level of paddy production.
Varying from 0.59 to 0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83.
The use of _F_-test in two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored
regression (Tobit model), with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups
and their interactions, has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical
efficiency among paddy farms of the state differs significantly across agro-
ecological zones and size groups as well. The study further indicated that
small-sized paddy farms in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III
are represented by ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus
achieving higher technical efficiency.

* * *

open in overlay

    Corresponding author. Tel.: 002517110102, Fax: 002517110575

Copyright © 1997 Published by Elsevier B.V.

[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/)

[About ScienceDirect](http://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect)[Remote
access](/science/activateaccess)[Shopping
cart](/science?_ob=ShoppingCartURL&_method=display&_zone=TopNavBar&_origin=article&md5=98a3e89aa38c5044516e5e4ca8b64e74)[Contact
and support](/science/contactus)[Terms and
conditions](https://www.elsevier.com/legal/elsevier-website-terms-and-
conditions)[Privacy policy](http://www.elsevier.com/legal/privacy-policy)

Cookies are used by this site. For more information, visit the [cookies
page](https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/sciencedirect/support/cookies).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect
® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.

[RELX Group](http://www.relx.com/)

Close overlay

Close

## Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials

Username:

Password:

Remember me

[Not Registered?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science/register-new-user "Register
a username and password for using alerts and other personal features" )

[Forgotten username or
password?](//www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ReminderURL&_method=display&md5=4a97631c25ac81c09ad2f961106e9da2
"Click here for help in recovering your ScienceDirect access" )

[OpenAthens
login](https://auth.elsevier.com/ShibAuth/institutionLogin?entityID=https%3A%2F%2Fidp.eduserv.org.uk%2Fopenathens&appReturnURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Log in using OpenAthens" )

### Login via your institution

[Other institution
login](/science?_ob=FederationURL&_method=display&md5=e2d806d1e8c4953bc9f57621cb18fbd2&prevURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencedirect.com%2Fscience%2Farticle%2Fpii%2FS0169515097000042
"Other institution login" )

# Other users also viewed these articles

![](http://cdn.els-cdn.com/sd/sci_dir/closeButton.png)

![Please wait...](//sdfestaticassets-us-
east-1.sciencedirectassets.com/prod/63172d2565d7c5115f2894922444490db0fadc2f/images/loader.gif)

Do not show again


Vision 2023 Œ Strategic Initiatives in Agriculture 
 Tamil Nadu envisages achieving 5.0 percent 
of annual average growth rate in Agricultural sector.
  
To achieve this, key initiatives to be taken under 

Vision 2023 are: 
 Promote market driven agricultural produce 
 Accelerating Innovation and Extension 

Mechanism 
 Functional consolidation of land holdings 
 Emphasis on mechanization 
 Improving Productivity 
 Assurance of timely irrigation 
 Creating a robust supply chain 
 Skill development in agriculture 
  The investment proposed the agriculture 

sector is Rs.40,000 Crores Œ Rs.16000 Crore for 

improving water resources, Rs.13000 Crore for agro-

processing and value addition and Rs.11000 Crore for
 
other projects (cold storages, grain storage 

complexes, perishable air cargo complex, gamma 

irradiation facility and terminal market complexes.   
  
  Source:   Vision 2023, Government of Tamil Nadu. 
  
     AGRICULTURE 
 CHAPTER 
 IV 
 Agriculture is the principal source of livelihood f
or more than 40 percent of the 
population of this State. Agriculture provides wage
 goods required by the non-agricultural 
sectors and raw materials for the industrial sector
. Ratcheting up the growth of the economy 
would be possible provided the agriculture sector f
ares well on a sustained basis.  A good 
performance of the agriculture 

sector is viewed as an effective 

instrument for attainment of 

inclusive economic growth and 

poverty reduction. The State 

achieved an all-time high record 

production of 10.1 million tonnes 

of foodgrains during 2011-12 

and received the Krishi Karman 

Award from the Government of 

India. Tamil Nadu performed 

well ahead of other major States 

in terms of productivity of 

important crops.  It ranked 

second in the productivity of 

paddy next only to Punjab and 

came first in the yield of maize 

and oilseeds. The productivity of 

sugarcane in Tamil Nadu was 

almost double of what was 

obtained at the national level. 

The better agricultural 

accomplishments are the result 

of continued technological gains 

and appropriate policies and timely 

intervention measures of the Government.  
 Unfortunately, the strong growth performance of 201
1-12 has been interrupted due to 
the severe drought conditions caused by a large rai
nfall deficit and the non-release of water 
in the Cauvery by Karnataka during 2012-13.  Growth
 in the agricultural sector has taken a 
big dip in 2012-13.  The State Government has stepp
ed in with the special relief packages for  
samba paddy to aid farmers in distress and to ensur
e an early recovery of agricultural 
production and productivity.     
 During the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), the State
 Department of Agriculture™s focus 
will continue to be on stabilizing foodgrain produc
tion so as to ensure food and nutrition 
security. It is planned to achieve the rate of grow
th of 5.0 percent in agricultural output. 
Further, it aims to increase the production to 170 
lakh tonnes in the case of foodgrains, 5 lakh 
bales of cotton, 545 lakh tonnes of cane and 17 lak
h tonnes of oilseeds.  The task is highly 
challenging. Therefore, the focus is to improve the
 yield rate per unit of land/ water. Apart 

Vision 2023 Œ Strategic Initiatives in Agriculture 
 Tamil Nadu envisages achieving 5.0 percent 
of annual average growth rate in Agricultural sector.
  
To achieve this, key initiatives to be taken under 

Vision 2023 are: 
 Promote market driven agricultural produce 
 Accelerating Innovation and Extension 

Mechanism 
 Functional consolidation of land holdings 
 Emphasis on mechanization 
 Improving Productivity 
 Assurance of timely irrigation 
 Creating a robust supply chain 
 Skill development in agriculture 
  The investment proposed the agriculture 

sector is Rs.40,000 Crores Œ Rs.16000 Crore for 

improving water resources, Rs.13000 Crore for agro-

processing and value addition and Rs.11000 Crore for
 
other projects (cold storages, grain storage 

complexes, perishable air cargo complex, gamma 

irradiation facility and terminal market complexes.   
  
  Source:   Vision 2023, Government of Tamil Nadu. 
  
     AGRICULTURE 
 CHAPTER 
 IV 
 Agriculture is the principal source of livelihood f
or more than 40 percent of the 
population of this State. Agriculture provides wage
 goods required by the non-agricultural 
sectors and raw materials for the industrial sector
. Ratcheting up the growth of the economy 
would be possible provided the agriculture sector f
ares well on a sustained basis.  A good 
performance of the agriculture 

sector is viewed as an effective 

instrument for attainment of 

inclusive economic growth and 

poverty reduction. The State 

achieved an all-time high record 

production of 10.1 million tonnes 

of foodgrains during 2011-12 

and received the Krishi Karman 

Award from the Government of 

India. Tamil Nadu performed 

well ahead of other major States 

in terms of productivity of 

important crops.  It ranked 

second in the productivity of 

paddy next only to Punjab and 

came first in the yield of maize 

and oilseeds. The productivity of 

sugarcane in Tamil Nadu was 

almost double of what was 

obtained at the national level. 

The better agricultural 

accomplishments are the result 

of continued technological gains 

and appropriate policies and timely 

intervention measures of the Government.  
 Unfortunately, the strong growth performance of 201
1-12 has been interrupted due to 
the severe drought conditions caused by a large rai
nfall deficit and the non-release of water 
in the Cauvery by Karnataka during 2012-13.  Growth
 in the agricultural sector has taken a 
big dip in 2012-13.  The State Government has stepp
ed in with the special relief packages for  
samba paddy to aid farmers in distress and to ensur
e an early recovery of agricultural 
production and productivity.     
 During the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), the State
 Department of Agriculture™s focus 
will continue to be on stabilizing foodgrain produc
tion so as to ensure food and nutrition 
security. It is planned to achieve the rate of grow
th of 5.0 percent in agricultural output. 
Further, it aims to increase the production to 170 
lakh tonnes in the case of foodgrains, 5 lakh 
bales of cotton, 545 lakh tonnes of cane and 17 lak
h tonnes of oilseeds.  The task is highly 
challenging. Therefore, the focus is to improve the
 yield rate per unit of land/ water. Apart 

from that, for attaining higher levels of productio
n, considerable importance is accorded to 
crop-specific strategies. New strategies are being 
evolved to break yield barriers, to utilize 
inputs more efficiently and diversify to more susta
inable and higher value crops. 
 In the above backdrop, the performance of the agric
ultural sector during 2011-12 and 
2012-13 is fully reviewed using the data available.
 For 2013-14, the prospects of the 
agricultural sector are based on the data available
, forecasts and projections made and target 
set.  
 4.1. Agriculture Prospects Œ 2013-14 
 The overall crop prospects in the State during 2013
 Œ 14 are encouraging.  During the 
current year the onset of the South-West Monsoon wa
s in time. The temporal spread of 
rainfall during this monsoon was by and large favou
rable for raising crops.  It was ‚excess™ in 
June and August and ‚normal™ in September. The spat
ial spread indicated that it was ‚normal™ 
in 17 districts, ‚excess™ in 7 districts, ‚deficit™
 in 6 districts and ‚scanty™ in 2 districts.  Thus,
 the 
spatial spread benefited 73.0 percent of the total 
geographical area of the State spread over 
24 districts.  The total quantum of rainfall receiv
ed  from this  season at 325.4 mm  was  rated  
as ‚normal™. The temporal and spatial 

spread of rainfall during this monsoon was 

also helpful in recharging the groundwater 

considerably. Apart from this, the monsoon 

brought copious inflows into the State™s 

surface flow sources and built up adequate  

storages. In tune with the requirements of 

the farmers, the release of water from the 

main reservoir viz., Mettur dam since 2
rd
 August 2013 was regulated in a systematic 

manner with adequate quantity. The 

release of water from other important 
reservoirs was also in accordance with the requirem
ents of the farmers. 
 The irrigation scenario in the State during the cur
rent year 2013 Œ 14 has turned out to 
be encouraging.  This resulted in an increase in th
e area under irrigated cropping in the 
State. Besides, the Government made fool-proof arra
ngements for the timely and adequate 
supply of all necessary inputs through Agricultural
 Extension Centres. The Co-operative 
Societies were geared up to provide adequate crop l
oans to the eligible farmers. The State 
Government provided uninterrupted 12 hours three ph
ase power supply to the delta districts 
and 8 hours for non-delta districts for encouraging
 the farmers to take up agricultural activities 
with sub-surface water.   All these efforts of the 
State were aimed to motivate the farmers and 
to redouble their efforts to take up agricultural a
ctivities with more vigour during the current 
year.  
 The intervention of North-East Monsoon during the y
ear was in time.  However, the 
rainfall received was in deficit during the entire 
season.  It was (-) 29.6 percent in October 
2013, (-) 33.7 percent in November 2013 and (-) 39.
3 percent in December 2013.  During this 
monsoon period, as against the normal level of 440.
4 mm, the actual rainfall received in the 
State was 294.3 mm (-33.2%).  The spatial spread al
so was uneven.  The uneven distribution 
of rainfall over time and space during the North-Ea
st Monsoon would have some adverse 
impact on the standing crops and crops grown mainly
 under rainfed conditions. The carry-
over storages in the surface flow sources that came
 from the South-West Monsoon were 
utilized.  As a result, it is hoped to bring in mor
e area under cultivation, area irrigated and to 
Table No. 4.1 Rainfall in Tamil Nadu (mm) 
Year 
South-
West 
Monsoon 
North-East 
Monsoon 
Annual 
Normal 
321.3 
440.4 
921.0 
2009-10 
317.0 
482.6 
937.8 
2010-11 
383.6 
605.2 
1165.1 
2011-12 
300.5 
540.8 
937.1 
2012-13 
245.9 
370.5 
743.1 
2013-14 325.4 294.3 -- 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai - 6
 
reduce current fallows to a considerable extent as 
compared to the level of 2012-13. All these 
factors would be conducive for the agricultural sec
tor to recover from the impact of drought 
witnessed in the previous year 2012-13 during 2013-
14. Ultimately, the overall cropping 
scenario in the State for the year is turning out t
o be encouraging.   
 With the favourable interplay of the above factors,
 the State forecasts to attain higher 
crop production during 2013-14 as compared to 2012-
13. This would be possible with an 
increase in the coverage of area under cropping as 
well as the yield of crops.  As per Second 
Advance Estimates for 2013-14 the expected rate of 
increase in the production of foodgrains 
would be from 56.05 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 to 85.46
 lakh tonnes in 2013-14 (53.0%), 
groundnut from 7.85 lakh tonnes to 9.90 lakh tonnes
 (26.0%), cotton from 2.55 lakh bales to 
3.18 lakh bales (25.0%) and sugarcane from 340.14 l
akh tonnes to 375.46 lakh tonnes  
(10.0%).  Ultimately the contribution of the agricu
ltural sector to Gross State Domestic 
Product (GSDP) is anticipated to register a higher 
order growth 8.22 per cent during the 
current year 2013-14 as against the 5.0 percent con
templated during the 12
th
 Five Year Plan.     
 4.2. Agricultural Performance during 2011 Œ 12 and 
2012 Œ 13: 
  The agricultural sector witnessed a severe drought
 impacting the area, yield and 
production of all important crops in the State duri
ng 2012 Œ 13.  This brought about a steep 
fall of 13.04 percent in the Gross State 

Domestic Product (GSDP) of the 

agricultural sub sector between 2011 Œ 

12 and 2012 - 13.  As a result, the 

relative share of the sub sector in the 

primary sector declined from 83.0 

percent in 2011 Œ 12 to 80.0 percent in 

2012 Œ 13 and in overall State™s GSDP 

from 7.4 percent to 6.2 percent.  
 The ‚deficit rainfall™ during the pre-monsoon perio
d viz., January 2012 Œ May 2012 (-) 
39.9 percent, South-West Monsoon period June 2012  
Œ September 2012  (-)24 percent and 
the  ‚uneven temporal spread™ of the northeast mons
oon (October +42.0%, November (-) 
54.0% & December (-) 62.0%), coupled with non-relea
se of Cauvery water for agricultural 
purposes by Karnataka State and depletion of ground
water level had its adverse impact on 
‚surface™ and ‚sub-surface™ water level during the 
year 2012 Œ 13. As against the total storage 
capacity of 198.384 tmcft in 15 major irrigation re
servoirs in the State, the live storage by the 
end of December 2012 was only 31.28 tmcft (16%). Th
e storage in these reservoirs in 2011 
was comfortably high at 68.0 percent and the live s
torage was 134.70 tmcft.  The average 
water levels in 1,261 observation wells maintained 
by
 Tamil Nadu Water Supply and 
Table No. 4.2   Trends in contribution of  
Agriculture Sector to GSDP 
(Rs. lakhs)
 Year GSDP Primary Sector Agriculture 
 2008-09 32179336 3079411 2509330 
2009-10 35663186 3279727 2673838 
2010-11 40341573 3516987 2879460 
2011-12 RE 43323803 3872767 3197598 
2012-13 QE 44794362 3477727 2780764 
RE- Revised Estimates,  QE- Quick Estimates 

Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai -6  
Table No. 4.3 Level of Depletion of Ground Water 
(Difference between 2012 and 2013) 
Higher than the State Average (Districts 
recording) 
Lower than the State Average(Districts recording) 
Ariyalur (5.9), Coimbatore (7.9), Dindigul (3.3), 

Erode (5.1), Madurai (7.5), Perambalur (6.7), 

Pudukkottai (2.3), Salem (4.3), Theni (7.7), 

Tirunelveli (5.3), Tiruppur (4.0), Thiruvarur (3.9)
, 
Tiruchirappalli (5.6) and Virudhunagar (2.3). 
Cuddalore (1.6), Dharmapuri (0.9), Kancheepuram (1.
6), 
Kanniyakumari (1.3), Karur (0.7), Krishnagiri (0.5)
, 
Nagapattinam (1.9), Namakkal (0.3), Ramanadhapuram 

(1.4), Sivagangai (1.0), Thanjavur (0.6), Tuticorin
 (0.9) 
and Thiruvannamalai (1.4). 
Note: 1. The ground water levels in  three district
s Viz., Vellore,Thiuvallur and Viluppuram did not 
experience any fall. 

2. Figures in brackets indicate the fall in the lev
el of ground water in meters. 
Source: Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board,
 Chennai Œ 5.  

Drainage (TWAD) Board throughout the State, experie
nced a fall in ground water table.  The 
average fall in the ground water level in the State
 between January 2012 and 2013 was from 
5.37 meters to 7.34 meters i.e., by 1.97 meters.   
 As against the normal rainfall of 921.0 mm, the tot
al quantum of rainfall received 
during the year 2012 Œ13 was 743.1 mm.  Eventhough 
it was rated as normal, the continuous 
long dry spell in the State, had its adverse impact
 on ‚surface™ and ‚sub-surface™ water caused 
‚drought™ affecting agricultural activities in the 
State. 
 The adverse effect of the 
drought got reflected in the 

reduction in gross area sown by 

12.7 percent, gross area irrigated 

by 15.0 percent and increase in 

fallows by 17.3 percent in 2012 Œ 13 

as compared to 2011 Œ 12.  The 

cropping intensity declined from 

118.1 percent in 2011-12 to 113.1 

percent in 2012-13 and that of 

irrigation intensity from 119.0 percent to 113.2 pe
rcent.   
  
Based on the report of the High Level Committee and
 taking into account the 
prevailing drought situation, in February 2013, the
 Government declared 31 districts of Tamil 
Nadu except Chennai as drought-affected and sanctio
ned various relief measures separately 
for delta and non-delta districts. Apart from this,
 a Drought Memorandum seeking assistance 
of Rs.19, 665.13 crore was sent to Government of In
dia.  
 4. 3. Land Holdings:       
            
A combination of factors such as
 i
ncreasing 
industrialization, urbanization, housing activities
 and 
infrastructure development triggered the conversion
 of 
agricultural land into non agricultural uses. This 
has 
resulted in a decline of the area under cultivation
. The 
scope for expansion of the area available for culti
vation is 
also very limited.  The pattern of land ownership i
mposes 
limitations on the models that can be adopted for 

agricultural development.  As per the latest Agricu
ltural 
Census 2010-11, marginal and small holdings   of
 less 
than 2 hectares accounted for 92.0 percent of the t
otal 
holdings and 61.0 percent of the total operated are
a. They in turn are unsuitable for 
conventional technology and machinery use to boost 
agricultural production. This led to a 
process of marginalization of small and marginal fa
rmers and casualization of agricultural 
labourers. To derive the best results and to empowe
r marginal and small farmers, they may 
be motivated to form farmers™ groups so as to get a
ll the technical inputs in time and to 
ensure judicious use of various scarce resources.
  The total number of operational land holdings in th
e State declined from 81.93 lakh in 
2005 Œ 06 to 81.18 lakh in 2010 Œ 11 (0.9%).  This 
implies that the farmers may have given 
up their cultivation because of the lucrative price
 offered for land on account of fast 
urbanization. This was more prevalent in the vicini
ty of urban areas.  Among the districts, the 
number of land holdings was the lowest in The Nilgi
ris (64,369) and the highest in 
Table No. 4.4  Land use pattern in Tamil Nadu 
(Lakh Hectares) 
Category 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
1. Fallows  
 (Current + Others) 
25.95 25.61 30.04 
2. Area sown: 

a. Net 

b. Gross 
 49.54 

57.53 
 49.86 

58.90 
 45.44 

51.40 
3. Area Irrigated: 

a. Net 

b. Gross 
 29.12 

33.48 
 29.64 

35.19 
 26.43 

29.91 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Chenn
ai-6. 
 
Villuppuram (6,15,543). Tamil Nadu™s share of the t
otal all-India operational holdings as per 
the 2010-11 Agricultural Census at 137.8 million wa
s 5.9 percent.  With continuous 
fragmentation of small (1 to 2 hectares), medium (2
 to 10 hectares) and large (10 hectares 
and above) holdings, the number of marginal holding
s increased in the State from 62.28 lakh 
to 62.66 lakh (0.6%) between the two Censuses. The 
share of marginal and small holdings in 
total holdings in the State rose from 91.1 percent 
to 91.7 percent. It was 85 percent at the all-
India level. 
 The total area operated also 
declined from 68.24 lakh hectares in 

2005 Œ 06 to 64.88 lakh hectares in 

2010 Œ 11 (4.9%).  Of the total area 

operated in all India at 159.2 million 

hectares, Tamil Nadu accounted for 4 

percent. The average size of land holding in the St
ate further reduced from 0.83 hectare in 
2005-06 to 0.80 hectare in 2010-11.  The average si
ze of land holding at the all-India level 
was comparatively higher at 1.16 hectare.    
 Among the districts as per the Agriculture Census 2
010-11, the average size of land 
holding was in the range of 0.22 hectare in Kanniya
kumari to 2.00 hectare in Tiruppur.  Out of 
31 districts, in as many as 18 districts the averag
e size of holdings was below the State™s 
average (0.80 hectare). The small size of land hold
ings inhibits investment in productivity-
enhancing measures and makes many agricultural hold
ings sub-optimal.   
 The average size of large holdings at 20.58 hectare
s in Tamil Nadu  was  higher than 
the all-India average size 17.38 hectares.  In Tami
l Nadu, the average size of marginal 
Table No.4.5 Distribution of Number of Holdings and
 Area Operated
 in Tamil Nadu as per Agriculture Census
 Category 
Number of holdings 
(lakhs) 
Area operated  
(lakh. ha.) 
Average size of holdings 
(ha.) 
2005-06 2010-11 2005-06 2010-11 2005-06 2010-11 
Marginal (< 1 hectare) 62.28 62.66 22.86 22.92 0.37
 0.37 
Small (1 to 2 hectare) 12.34 11.82 17.21 16.44 1.39
 1.39 
Medium ( 2 to 10 hectare) 7.12 6.53 24.26 22.03 3.4
1 3.37 
Big (> 10 hectare) 0.19 0.17 3.91 3.50 20.58 20.59 
Total 81.93 81.18 68.24 64.88 0.83 0.80 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Che
nnai Œ 6.  
Table No.4.6  Average size of Land Holding by Distr
icts 
District above the State 
level  
District below the State 
 level 
1. Tiruppur   2.00 1. Kancheepuram 0.66 
2. Coimbatore 1.81 2.Thiruvallur 0.59 
3. Karur 1.42 3.Vellore 0.65 
4. Erode 1.35 4. Thiruvannamalai 0.68 
5. The Nilgiris 1.25 5. Villupuram 0.67 
6. Thoothukudi 1.22 6.Cuddalore 0.72 
7. Dindigul 1.06 7. Thanjavur 0.72 
8. Theni 1.00 8. Dharmapuri 0.77 
9 .Virudhunagar 0.93 9. Tiruchirappalli 0.78 
10. Thiruvarur 0.92 10. Perambalur 0.75 
11. Namakkal 0.91 11. Pudukkottai 0.59 
12. Nagapattinam 0.86 12. Ramanadhapuram 0.72 
13. Salem 0.84 13. Sivagangai 0.62 
  14. Madurai 0.58 
  15. Tirunelveli 0.72 
  16. Kanniyakumari 0.22 
  17. Krishnagiri 0.80 
  18. Ariyalur 0.58 
State                             0.80 
Source: Department of Economics and Statistics,  

Chennai - 6 

holdings at 0.37 hectare, small holdings at 1.39 he
ctare and medium holdings at 3.37 hectare 
were somewhat smaller than that of all-India at 0.3
8 hectare, 1.42 hectare and 3.60 hectare 
respectively.    
 Of the total land holdings in State, institutional 
holdings accounted for a meagre share 
of 0.24 percent and in the total operated area its 
share was 2.05 percent. Among the districts, 
the number of institutional holdings ranged between
 63 in Salem and 2,583 in 
Kanniyakumari.   
 4.4. Performance of Principal Crops: 
 Achieving food security by increasing agricultural 
production forms the core of 
agricultural development strategy in the State. Thi
s policy assumes greater significance with 
the increasing population and accelerating economic
 growth.  A number of programmes have 
been launched for increasing production of agricult
ural commodities in the State at different 
points of time.  Thanks to the favourable temporal 
and spatial spread of rainfall and adequate 
availability of water both in surface and sub-surfa
ce flow for irrigation, the production of 
principal crops in the State witnessed increase  in
 2011-12 as compared to the previous year 
2010-11. The increase in production was mainly addu
ced to the increase in yield rate of 
crops rather than that of area.  In 2012-13, the si
tuation was entirely different.  The prolonged 
dry spell, the deficit rainfall during South-West M
onsoon, the uneven temporal spread during 
the North-East Monsoon and the decline in water ava
ilability in surface and sub-surface 
sources for irrigation produced adverse effect on c
ropped area and area irrigated.  On the 
other  hand, there was an increase in fallows cause
d by the wide spread drought.  The   area, 
yield and production of all crops in the State were
 affected during 2012-13.  The fall in yield 
was more pronounced than that of area.   
  During 2011-12, there was an all-time high producti
on of foodgrains at 101.52 lakh 
tonnes.  However, a wide spread drought during 2012
-13 triggered a steep decline in 
foodgrains production to 56.05 lakh tonnes (45.0%).
 The fall 
in the production of all constituents of foodgrains
 viz., rice, 
pulses and millets  caused the overall decline in f
oodgrains 
production during 2012-13. Among them the fall in r
ice 
production was much pronounced. In the case of prod
uction 
of rice, it fell from 74.59 lakh tonnes in 2011-12 
to 40.50 lakh 
tonnes in 2012-13 (46.0%). It was mainly due to the
 fall in 
yield rate of rice rather than the drop in area. Th
e area under 
paddy declined by 22.0 percent and that of yield by
 31.0 
percent  between these two years.  The per hectare 
yield rate 
Table No.4.7  Performance of Principal Crops in Tam
il Nadu 
Crops 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
# A Y P A Y P A Y P 
Paddy 19.04 3918 74.59 14.93 2712 40.50 18.49 3097 
57.26 
Millets  6.38 3643 23.24 6.42 2092 13.42 9.10 2747 
25.00 
Pulses 6.67 554 3.69 5.11 415 2.13 7.73 414 3.20 
Foodgrains 32.09 3164 101.52 26.46 2118 56.05 35.32
 2420 85.46 
Sugarcane
@ 3.46 113 389.75 3.48 98 340.14
 3.58 105 375.46 
Cotton* 1.36 481 3.82 1.33 326 2.55 1.50 361 3.18 
Oilseeds  4.49 2481 11.14 3.90 2092 8.16 4.61 2245 1
0.35 
Note: A Œ Area in lakh hectares; Y Œ Yield in kgs per
 hectare; P -  Production in lakh tonnes * in terms 
of lint; @ - in 
terms of cane          # - Forecast estimates.  

Source: Department of Economics and Statistics, Che
nnai Œ 6
 
of paddy (in terms of rice)  at  3,918 kgs during t
he year 2011-12 was the best. In 2012-13 it 
declined to 2,712 kgs.  However, the yield rate of 
the crop  also  varied  within  the  State  as 
well as among  the  seasons  significantly.  Across
 the State the yield rate of paddy ranged 
between 588 kgs per hectare in Ramanathapuram and 4
728 kgs per hectare in 
kanniyakumari districts in 2012-13.  Among the seas
ons, the normal yield (average for the 5 
years ending 2011-12) obtained at 3,799 kgs per hec
tare in Kar/Kuruvai/Sornavari season 
was the highest as compared to 2,913 kgs in 

Samba/Thaladi/Pisanam and 3,552 kgs in 

Navarai/Kodai.  In the light of limited scope for 

expanding area under cultivation and under irrigati
on, 
the only way to meet the growing food requirement, 
 is to 
narrow down the vast gap in the yield rate among th
e 
districts as well as between the seasons. This call
s for 
the need for renewed research effort to narrow down
 the 
yield gap.  In 2013-14, it is anticipated to cover 
18.49 
lakh hectares under paddy and to produce 57.26 lakh
 
tonnes of rice. 
 Coarse cereals comprise crops like jowar, cumbu, ra
gi, maize and other small millets 
(korra , varagu, samai) which have traditionally be
en the main components of the food 
basket. These crops are being grown predominantly i
n rainfed conditions. Changing 
consumption pattern, non-adoption of the recommende
d doses of inputs due to high risk 
under rainfed agro-climatic conditions, non-availab
ility of high yielding variety quality seeds 
particularly of small millets, lack of assured proc
urement and poor resource base of the 
farmers who largely grow these crops are the limiti
ng factors in increasing the area and 
production of coarse cereals.  The total millets pr
oduction in the State dwindled from 23.24 
lakh tonnes in 2011-12 to 13.42 lakh tonnes in 2012
-13 (42.3%).  Eventhough the area 
increased by 0.6 percent between these two years, t
he fall in yield rate by 43.0 percent 
caused on overall decline in millets production. Wi
th the increase in the coverage to 9.10 lakh 
hectares during 2013-14, the total production of co
arse cereals is likely to go up to 25.0 lakh 
tonnes. 
  Being rich in protein, pulses not only form a vital
 part of the human diet, but also play 
a crucial role in balancing the dietary proteins. T
he major pulse crops grown are green gram 
(24.6%), black gram (46.2%) and horse gram (10.3%) 
which accounted for 81.1 percent of 
the total area under pulses in the State in 2011-12
. Cultivation of pulses is mostly (89.4% of 
the area) under rainfed condition on marginal lands
 with less fertile soil by resource-poor 
farmers.  The wide spread drought also affected the
 area, yield and production of pulses 
during 2012-13.  The decline in area was 23.4 perce
nt 
and in yield was 25.1 percent.  This caused a fall 
in 
pulses production in the State from 3.69 lakh tonne
s in 
2011-12 to 2.13 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 (42.3%).  Th
e 
average yield rate of pulses in the State even at i
ts peak 
at 554 kgs per hectare during 2011-12 was short of 
the 
all India average 694 kgs per hectare.  The total a
rea 
under pulses is likely to go up to 7.73 lakh hectar
es in 
2013-14 and the anticipated production is 3.20 lakh
 
tonnes. Non- availability of high yielding varietie
s, low 
Seed Replacement Rate (SRR), high susceptibility to
 
pests are the primary reasons for low yield of puls
es. To 

attain higher levels in yield rates focus needs  ex
pansion in area under micro irrigation, more 
use of micro nutrients, adoption of improved produc
tion practices and evolving better yielding 
seeds.  
 Sugarcane is the most important cash crop in the 
State which is widely cultivated in irrigated condi
tions. 
Despite drought, the crop™s coverage did not suffer
 during 
2012-13.  In fact, it increased from 3.46 lakh hect
ares in 
2011-12 to 3.48 lakh hectares in 2012-13 (0.6%).  F
ixing of 
a higher State Advised Price (SAP) by the State 

Government at Rs.2,350/- per tonne linked to 9.5 pe
rcent 
recovery rate in 2012-13 as compared to that of 

Government of India™s Statutory Minimum Price of Rs
. 
1,700/- per tonne and the increase in area register
ed with 
sugar mills under the crop from 2.75 lakh hectares 
in 2011-12 to 2.81 lakh hectares in 2012-
13 were responsible for enlarging the crop™s covera
ge. Contrary to this trend, the yield rate 
fell from 113 tonnes per hectare in 2011-12 to 98 t
onnes per hectare in 2012-13.  The fall in 
yield rate was responsible for the decline in cane 
production from 389.75 lakh tonnes in 
2011-12 to 340.14 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 (12.7%).  
The recovery rate of cane also declined 
from 9.35 to 8.68 percent between these two years. 
 This underlines the need for evolving 
new varieties having more sugar content.  The cane 
production during 2013-14 is likely to be 
of the order of 375.5 lakh tonnes.   The State Gove
rnment has increased the State Advised 
Price to Rs.2,650/- per tonne this year.   
 Highly as volatile cotton prices and high cost of p
est 
control are the two major factors that limit the ex
pansion of 
area under cotton in the State.  The area under thi
s crop 
marginally fell from 1.36 lakh hectares in 2011-12 
to 1.33 
lakh hectares in 2012-13 (2.2%) and the yield rate 
(lint) from 
481 kgs to 326 kgs (32.2%). They triggered the decl
ine in 
production from 3.82 lakh bales to 2.55 lakh bales 
(33.2%) 
of cotton in the State. During 2013-14 the coverage
 under 
the crop would be 1.50 lakh hectares and that of pr
oduction 
3.18 lakh bales. Developing cotton varieties suitab
le for 
increasing yield, especially, under rainfed conditi
ons, continuous follow up of pest monitoring 
and advisory services are some of the issues meriti
ng serious attention to increase the 
production and productivity of cotton in the State.
  
 Oilseeds cultivation is undertaken across the State
 
on marginal lands, dependent on monsoons with low l
evel 
of input usage.  Of the total area cultivated under
 oilseeds 
edible oilseeds accounted for 99.0 percent and rest
 being 
non-edible oilseeds.  The prominent oilseeds raised
 were 
groundnut, gingelly, castor and sunflower.  The tem
poral 
and spatial spread of rainfall during the year 2012
-13 was 
not beneficial to raising of oilseeds. Consequently
, the total 
area cultivated under these crops and the average y
ield 
rate declined from 4.49 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to
 3.90 
lakh hectares in 2012-13 (13.1%) and from 2,481 kgs
 to 
2,092 kgs (15.7%) per hectare respectively. This br
ought about a fall in the overall production 
of oilseeds in the State from 11.14 lakh tonnes to 
8.16 lakh tonnes (26.8%) between these 

two years. During 2013-14 the production would be o
f the order of 10.35 lakh tonnes. The 
following measures are needed to improve the area, 
yield and production of oilseeds: i) 
minimizing the wide inter-district variations in th
e yield level by adopting suitable package of 
practices and ii) evolving hybrids/high yielding va
rieties having more oil content but at the 
same time weathering the natural calamities and pes
t and diseases attack.   
 4.5  Horticulture: 
 In the context of increasing population, swelling u
rbanization and a favourable shift in 
consumption of fruits and vegetables, there is a ne
ed for covering larger areas under 
horticulture crops. Horticulture crops in Tamil Nad
u account for nearly 17 percent of the total 
cropped area. There has been a steady increase in t
he area covered under horticulture crops 
in the recent past.  The total area covered under h
orticulture crops in the  State  moved up 
from 10.01 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 10.81 lakh h
ectares in 2012-13 (8.0%) and would  
further  rise to 11.46  lakh hectares in 2013-14 (6
.0%).  Fruits, vegetables, spices and 
condiments and plantation crops together claimed a 
share of 96.0 percent of the total area 
covered under horticultural crops. The overall yiel
d rate exhibited a steady improvement.  The 
average yield rate of horticultural crops per hecta
re improved from 15.24 tonnes in 2011-12 
to 16.09 tonnes in 2012-13 (5.6%)  and  would furth
er  improve to  16.69  tonnes   in 2013-14 
(3.7%). The increase in area and yield rate helped 
to augment the total production of 
horticultural crops from 152.62 lakh tonnes in 2011
-12 to 173.99 lakh tonnes in 2012-13 
(14.0%) and further to 191.31 lakh tonnes in 2013-1
4 (10.0%).
  During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the State 
schemes viz., the Integrated Horticulture Developme
nt 
Schemes (IHDS) (Rs.28.59 crore), Integrated Tribal 

Development Programmes (ITDP) (Rs.2.0 crore), Weste
rn 
Ghats Development Programme (WGDP) and Hill Area 

Development Programme (HADP) (Rs. 12.40 crore) and 

National Agricultural Development Programme (NADP) 
(Rs. 
182.45 crore) were implemented.  The Centrally-Spon
sored 
Schemes like National Horticulture Mission (NHM) (R
s. 
479.01 crore), National Mission on Micro Irrigation
 (NMMI) 
(Rs. 256.01 crore), National Bamboo Mission (NBM) (
Rs. 
3.73 crore) and National Mission on Medicinal Plant
s (NMMP) (Rs. 27.30 crore) were also in 
operation.  The State also implemented the World Ba
nk assisted IAMWARM project (Rs. 72.0 
crore) for expansion of area with high value hortic
ultural crops in 61 sub-basins in Tamil 
Nadu.  Under precision farming, an extent of 22,294
 hectares was covered and 1,238 
Table No.4.8  Performance of Horticulture Crops in 
Tamil Nadu 
Crops 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
# A Y P A Y P A Y P 
Fruits  2.87 20.48 58.77 3.10 21.62 67.00 3.29 22.4
3 73.70 
Vegetables 2.54 27.25 69.27 2.74 28.77 78.96 2.90 2
9.95 86.79 
Spices & 

Condiments  
1.65 6.11 10.05 1.78 6.44 11.46 1.88 6.69 12.61 
Plantation Crops 2.55 4.12 10.50 2.75 4.34 11.97 2.
92 4.51 13.16 
Medicinal and 

aromatic crops 
0.14 9.20 1.29 0.15 9.73 1.48 0.16 9.91 1.62 
Flowers 0.26 10.35 2.74 0.29 10.92 3.12 0.31 11.12 
3.43 
Total Crops 10.01 15.24 152.62 10.81 16.09 173.99 1
1.46 16.69 191.31 
Note: A Œ Area in lakh hectares; Y Œ Yield in tonne  
per hectare; P -  Production in lakh tonnes 
# - Forecast estimates.   Source: Department of Hort
iculture and Plantation Crops,Chennai-5
 
clusters were established during 2008-11.  During t
he Eleventh Five Year Plan period, an 
area of 91,130 hectares was brought under micro irr
igation. All these schemes have gone a 
long way towards enhancing the production of hortic
ultural crops. 
 Even though many schemes are being implemented for 
the promotion of horticulture 
crops, yet the following impediments are still at w
ork: i) the perishable nature limits the  extent 
of market and transaction opportunities; ii) prices
 are highly volatile due to seasonal 
conditions;  iii) inadequate and timely availabilit
y of pedigree planting materials; iv) period of 
waiting is significantly long for those seeking qui
ck return and v) lack of technical guidance for 
increasing the productivity per unit of area due to
 weak extension machinery.  
 4.6  Trend in Overall Agricultural Production:  
 Index of Agricultural Production is the summary mea
sure which shows the pulse of 
the performance in agricultural sector. In view of 
the fact that the performance of the 
agricultural sector displays wide variations from y
ear to year, the trends in area, yield and 
production are analyzed during the 10
th
 (2002-03 to 2006-07) and 11
th
 (2007-08 to 2011-12) 
Five Year Plan  periods.  
  The overall agricultural production in the State h
ad gone up at an annual average 
growth rate of 7.29 percent during the 10
th
 Five Year plan period (2002-2007).This 
accomplishment is mainly due to the increase in yie
ld rate of crops.  There was an overall 
decline in area by 0.42 percent in this period. Dur
ing this Plan period, the production of food 
crops fared better than non-food crops. Turning to 
11
th
 Five Year Plan period (2007-2012), 
the overall agricultural production in the State de
clined by an annual average rate of 2.37 
percent.  The fall both in area 

and yield rate of crops was 

mainly responsible for this 

decline during the 11
th
 Plan 
period.  As between food and 

non-food crops, even though the 

latter registered a growth of 0.33 

percent, the decline in the 
production of food crops by an annual average 3.08 
percent engendered the fall in the overall 
agricultural production in the State.  In the case 
of food crops, both area and yield rate 
witnessed negative growth in this Plan period.  In 
respect of non-food crops, only the area 
under the crops registered a fall and the increase 
in yield rate of crops compensated the fall 
in area and contributed to the overall increase in 
production.  
 4.7  Yield Gap: 
 The yield gap is also a major issue 
that contributes to agricultural stagnation in 

the State.  There is considerable yield gap 

between on-farm trials and yield actually 

realized by the farmers.  Except paddy, 

there is significant yield gap in other crops.  

The yield gap is around 50.0 percent of the 

potential yield. This is because the 

adoption of agronomic practices has not 

been uniform and widespread. Agricultural 
Table No. 4.9 :  Index number of Area, Yield and Pr
oduction Œ 
Annual Average Growth Rate (%)  
 10
th
 Plan period 11
th
 Plan period 
Crops A Y P A Y P 
Food  0.17 5.11 7.94 (-)5.76 (-)2.65 (-)3.08 
Non-food 
  (-)2.31 6.15 5.96 (-)1.67 0.56 0.33 
All (-)0.42 5.24 7.29 (-)0.35 (-)1.96 (-)2.37 
Source: Compiled and Computed from the data received
 from the 
Department of Economics and Statistics Œ Chennai-6. 
Table No. 4.10   Yield Gap in Select Crops 
Crop 
Potential 
Yield 
(Kgs/ha.) 
Average Yield 
(Kgs/ha)  
(2011-12) 
Yield 
Gap 
(Kgs/ha.) 
Paddy 6000 3918 2082 
Red Gram 1500 870 630 
Black Gram 1270 580 690 
Sugarcane 146000 113000 33000 
Source: 1. Agriculture Development Strategy for Tam
il 
Nadu Œ 2004,   State Planning Commission ,   

Chennai Œ 5.  (page-22) 

2. Department of Economics and Statistics, Chennai 
- 6 

strategy has to focus attention towards bridging th
e gap between the potential yield and the 
actual yield realized.    
 4.8  Self-Reliance in Production: 
 The ICMR had estimated the per capita 
per day nutritional requirement of rice at 370 

grams and pulses at 70 grams.  Based on 

these norms the total requirement of these 

agricultural commodities for 2013-14 was 

worked out.  A comparison was made with the 

total estimated requirement and production.  

There was a shortfall between the requirement and t
he estimated production level of rice and 
pulses.  The gap was particularly significant in re
spect of pulses and illustrates that self 
sufficiency in food production in Tamil Nadu is som
e way off.     
 4.9  Loss of Agricultural Production due to Natural
 calamities:
  
  During 2011-12, a cyclone caused extensive damages
 to paddy, millets, pulses, 
sugarcane, groundnut and coconut in the districts o
f Cuddalore, Villupuram, Thanjavur, 
Nagapattinam, Thiruvarur, Kancheepuram, Thiruvallur
, Dharmapuri and Thiruvannamalai 
during the fag end of the North-East Monsoon period
. The total area affected was 1.88 lakh 
hectares and the total value of production loss amo
unted to Rs. 968.73 crore.  The relief 
measures were sanctioned to the level of Rs.174.24 
crore benefiting 2.91 lakh farmers.   
     Coupled with the prolonged dry 

spell since January 2012, the deficit 

rainfall during the South-West Monsoon 

and the uneven temporal and spatial 

spread of rainfall during the North-East 

Monsoon caused widespread drought in 

the State during 2012-13. The State 

Government declared 31 districts of Tamil 

Nadu except Chennai as drought affected 

and sanctioned various relief  measures  

to mitigate the sufferings of the farmers. In 

overall terms the total area and production 

affected by drought in the State during the 

year was estimated at 10.01 lakh hectares 

and 32.42 lakh tonnes respectively. The 

total value of loss of crop production was 

estimated at Rs. 3475.45 crore in the State. On an 
average, the loss of crop production per 
hectare worked out to Rs.34,719. In the case of foo
d crops, the total area affected by drought 
was 8.68 lakh hectares (86.7%) and production was 2
0.90 lakh tonnes (64.5%).  The total 
estimated value of loss of foodcrop production was 
Rs. 2770 crore (79.7%).  The total area 
affected under non food crops was 1.33 lakh hectare
s (13.3%).  The quantum of production 
under non-food crops affected by drought in the Sta
te was 11.52 lakh tonnes (35.5%) and the 
estimated loss of value was Rs.705 crore (20.3%). T
he State had sanctioned relief measures 
to the tune of Rs. 1,143 crore benefiting 20.33 lak
h farmers.  Of the total farmers benefited, 
those raising food crops accounted for 89.0 percent
 and the rest of the 11.0 percent were 
non-food crops cultivators.   
Table No. 4.11  Estimated ‚Requirement™ and 
‚Production™ of select Agricultural Commodities 
(As per II advanced Estimate)  
Commodities 
Estimated 
Requirement in a 
year (Lakh tonnes) 
Anticipated 
Production*  
(Lakh tonnes) 
2013-14 
Rice 
92.63 57.26 
Pulses 
10.01 3.20 
Source: * - Department of Economics and Statistics,
 
 Chennai -6 
Table No. 4.12  Loss of Agriculture Production due 
to 
Natural calamities and Relief measures provided 
Natural Calamities 
2011-12 
(Cyclone) 
2012-13 
(Drought) 
Area Affected (Lakh hectares) 
Food Crop 1.65 8.68 
Non-food crop 0.23 1.33 
Value of Crop loss (Rs. Crores)  
Food Crop 667.39 2770.48 
Non-food Crop 301.34 704.98 
Relief measures sanctioned 

 (Rs. crores) 
174.24 1143.26 
Farmers benefited (No. Lakhs ) 
Food Crop 2.55 18.07 
Non- food crop 0.36 2.26 
Area benefited (Lakh hectares) 
Food Crop 1.65 5.09 
Non-food crop 0.23 1.33 
Source:  Department of Agriculture, Chennai-5. 

4.10  Input Management: 
 Crop production is essentially a function of the in
terplay of natural resources such as 
land, water, soil, biodiversity with the plant gene
tic material i.e. use of quality seeds and use 
of other agricultural inputs like chemical fertiliz
ers, organic manure, pesticides, farm 
machinery and equipment, labour, credit and insuran
ce, pricing policy and marketing 
infrastructure. This section highlights the present
 status regarding the availability and access 
of agricultural inputs like seeds, fertilizers, pes
ticides, and credit which determine agricultural 
productivity and production.  
 4.10.1 Irrigation: 
  The annual per capita water availability in India 
is about 2200m
3 
whereas it is only 
about 750 m
3 
in Tamil Nadu. There are about 81 reservoirs, 41,12
7 tanks and 18.21 lakh 
wells in the State.  The total storage capacity of 

15 major reservoirs in the State is 198.38 tmcft.  

Against which water realization stood at 172.26 

tmcft in 2011-12 (86.8%).  Due to wide spread 

drought, water realization in the reservoirs in 

the State was restricted to 89.8 tmcft  in 2012-

13 (45.3%).  The decline in ground water table 

across the State is a matter of serious concern.  

As a result, out of 386 blocks in the State, 139 

blocks are categorized as over-exploited, 33 

blocks as critical, 67 blocks as semi-critical, 11 

blocks as poor quality and the balance 136 

blocks as safe.   
 The total net area irrigated in the State 
by all sources of irrigation declined from 29.64 

lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 26.43 lakh hectares 

in 2012-13 (10.8%).  There was a fall in gross 

area irrigated from 35.19 lakh hectares to 29.91 

lakh hectares (15.0%).  Canals accounted for 
22.0 percent, tanks for 16.0 percent and wells for 
62.0 percent. Eventhough the drought had 
its adverse effect on net area irrigated by differe
nt sources, it was more pronounced in the 
case of surface flow sources.  

It was 20.4 percent in the 

case of tanks and 20.9 

percent in respect of canals. 

The fall in net area irrigated 

by wells during 2012-13 was 

3.4 percent as compared to 

2011-12. The irrigation 

intensity in the State declined 

from 119.0 percent in 2011-12 

to 113.2 percent in 2012-13.   
 Water demand is increasing rapidly due to populatio
n growth, urbanization and 
changing lifestyle. Owing to increasing demand of w
ater for domestic, industrial and energy 
uses, there is a severe constraint in the availabil
ity of water for agriculture. Climate change 
Table No. 4.13 Water realization in Tamil Nadu
                   
(tmcft)
 Name of 
Reservoirs 
Actual 
Capacity 
 2011-12 2012-13 
Mettur 93470 87232 46897 
Bhavanisagar 32800 20942 6377 
Periyar 10570 6269 3361 
Sathanur 7321 6875 2342 
Vaigai 6091 5986 3460 
Manimuthar 5511 3657 3098 
Papanasam 5500 5304 2105 
Pechiparai 4450 4082 1256 
Amravathy 4047 4042 2049 
Perunchani 2890 2048 755 
Krishnagiri 1666 1580 1452 
Sholayar 5052 5298 5117 
Parambikulam 13408 13392 7391 
Aliyar 3864 3857 2592 
Thirumurthy 1744 1693 1555 
Total 198384 172257 89807 
Source: Chief Engineer,  Public Works Department, 

Chennai Œ 5.  
 Table No. 4.14 Net Area Irrigated  
(lakh hectares) 
Sources 2011-12 2012-13* 
Canals 7.46 5.90 
Tanks 5.28 4.20 
Wells 16.83 16.26 
Others 0.07 0.07 
Total 29.64 26.43 
Note - * Provisional, 

Source: Department of 

Economics and Statistics Œ 

Chennai-6. 

might complicate further the existing temporal and 
spatial variation in availability of water. 
Extreme events like floods and droughts are occurri
ng more frequently and affecting 
livelihood and food security. Low water use efficie
ncy and inadequate maintenance of 
irrigation systems are some of the major problems t
hat confront the management of water 
resources in the State. There is a need to promote 
participatory management of aquifers to 
ensure sustainable and equitable use of water. Prom
otion of micro-irrigation techniques, 
alignment of cropping patterns with the availabilit
y of water and greater involvement and 
empowerment of Water Users™ Associations in the com
mand areas could lead to 
improvement in water use efficiency.   
 With a view to improve the service delivery of the 
irrigation system and to increase the 
productivity with effective integrated water resour
ces management in a sub-basin frame work, 
a multi-sector  project Irrigated Agriculture Moder
nization and Water Bodies Restoration and 
Management Project (IAMWARM) with financial assista
nce of World Bank is being 
implemented in the State .  Between 2007-08 and 201
3-14, project rehabilitation works in 
4,549 tanks, 655 anaicuts and 8,018 k.m length of s
upply channels had been completed to 
benefit 6.69 lakh hectares with an expenditure of R
s.1,284 crores.  With the financial 
assistance of the Central and State Governments (50
:50), the Command Area Development 
Programme is currently being implemented in the Sta
te in Vaigai reservoir, Kodadanar 
reservoir, Varadhamanadhi reservoir, Kalingarayan a
naicut, Pelandurai anaicut, Cheyyur 
anaicut, Ellis anaicut and Manimutharu nadhi system
.  During 2012-13, on-farm development 
works were carried out to benefit 18,262 hectares a
t a cost of Rs.27.95 crore and Rotational 
Water Supply to benefit 18,267 hectares at a cost o
f Rs.0.60 crore. In 2013-14, on-farm 
development works are to be taken up to benefit an 
extent of area of 4,778 hectares at a total 
cost of Rs.38.83 crore under this programme.  Rotat
ional Water Supply works are also to be 
taken up to benefit 3,213 hectares at a cost of Rs.
0.78 crores. 
  Rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation str
uctures is taken up under the 
National Agriculture Development Programme.  For 20
12-13, out of 14 works accorded 
sanction at a cost of Rs. 9.21 crore, 7 works were 
completed.  The 13
th
 Finance Commission 
had recommended a grant of Rs. 200 crores for resto
ration of 674 traditional water bodies 
over a period of four years since 2011-12. During 2
012-13, 175 works were taken up at a 
cost Rs. 50 crore.  The Government has taken initia
tives to replenish the ground water 
potential through rain water harvesting and recharg
e structures.  Under Master Plan Artificial 
Recharge Scheme, the State had sanctioned Rs.550 cr
ores towards restoring the depleted 
aquifers through construction of check dams across 
rivers, streams, percolation ponds and 
recharge shafts.  Under the scheme, as against the 
target of 523 works, 429 works were 
completed at a total cost of Rs.199.66 crore up to 
2012-13.  The remaining 94 works at a cost 
of Rs. 65.45 crore are being taken up during the ye
ar 2013-14.  Under various schemes, 82 
percolation ponds at a cost of Rs.4.55 crore and fa
rm ponds numbering 320 were created at 
a cost of Rs.2.05 crore.   
 4.10.2 Seeds:    
 Quality seeds and planting materials are key 
agricultural inputs, which determine the productivi
ty of 
crops.  It is estimated that the quality of seed ac
counts 
for 20-25 percent of productivity. As a result of t
he 
adverse weather conditions, the quantum of supply o
f 
seeds in the State declined from 99,390 tonnes in 2
011-
12 to 73,033 tonnes in 2012-13.  In 2013-14 ( upto 
Feb 

2014), the supply of seeds  is 84,530 tonnes.  Howe
ver, as against the total estimated 
requirements, there was a persistent short fall in 
the supply of seeds by the organized sector 
(public and private) in the State. The short fall w
as conspicuous in respect of pulses, oil 
seeds and millets.  The organized sector had met on
ly 43 to 45 percent of the total seed 
requirements in the State. A larger portion of seed
 requirement i.e. about 57 to 55 percent 
continues to be met from the unorganized sector i.e
., mainly farm-saved seeds. Of the total 
quantum of seeds distributed by the organized secto
r during 2012-13, paddy alone 
accounted for 78.0 percent.  As against the stipula
ted seed replacement rate of 33.0 percent 
in respect of paddy, pulses and oilseeds and 50.0 p
ercent  for millets and cotton,  the actual 
rate fell short of in the case of pulses and oilsee
ds.  
 There is a need to develop better varieties/hybrids
/planting materials, which will be 
able to manifest itself even under challenging agro
-climatic conditions. The provision of 
subsidy for seeds for newer and older varieties nee
ds to be rationalized. The time is right to 
prepare a long term Seed Plan for the State keeping
 in mind the agro-climatic conditions, 
farmers™ requirements, SRR of the crops, State™s cr
op calendar and any contingent situations 
that may arise in order to ensure availability of q
uality seed at the right time to the farmers. In 
the absence of such a seed plan, farmers are forced
 to fall back on ‚farm-saved™ seeds or 
Truthfully Labelled Seeds.  Steps need to be taken 
to prepare a Seed Plan for 5 years. Seed 
Replacement needs the serious attention it deserves
.  
 4.10.3 Integrated Nutrient Management:
  
 Chemical fertilizers are the immediate source of nu
trients in the soils. In the State, a 
total number of 11,780 retail outlets effect fertil
izer distribution of which private retail outlets 
accounted for 63.0 percent and the rest being co-op
erative outlets. With the decline in 
cropped area as well as irrigated area consequent t
o the widespread drought, the total 
consumption of nitrogenous (N), 

phosphatic (P), potassic (K) fertilizers in 

the State declined to 13.74 lakh tonnes in 

2012-13 from 18.13 lakh tonnes in 2011-

12.  Eventhough, the three constituents 

witnessed a shortfall during 2012-13, it was 

much sharper in phosphatic (P) and 

potassic (K). In 2013-14, with the normal 

monsoon and increase in cropped as well 
as irrigated area, the total fertilizer consumption
 in the State would likely to go up to 13.88 
lakh tonnes.   
 The consumption of NPK in the State is found to be 
in the ratio of 4:1:1 in 2012-13 as 
against the conventionally accepted ratio of 4:2:1 
indicating imbalances in the application of 
three chemical nutrients.  Continuation of subsidy 
on urea while decontrolling phosphate and 
Table No. 4.15    Distribution of Seeds in Organize
d Sector  (Tonnes) 
Crop 
2011-12 2012-13 20013-14 (Upto Feb™ 2014) 
Require
- ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Require
--ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Require
-ment 
Distri-
bution 
SRR 
% 
Paddy 110000 75250 68 78920 56716 72 100000 65000 6
5 
Millets 12153 6693 55 10637 5398 51 11733 8806 75 
Pulses 24000 4800 20 20800 4768 38 20800 4373 29 
Oilseeds 80612 12092 15 108186 5601 11 105638 5862 
13 
Cotton 555 555 100 550 550 100 555 489 88 
Total 227320 99390  219093 73033  238726 84530  
Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5. 
Table No. 4.16  Consumption of Chemical Fertilizers
 
    
                          in Tamil Nadu   
(lakh tonnes)
 Nutrients 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14* 
Nitrogenous 10.40 9.28 9.03 
Phosphorus  3.57 2.29 2.30 
Potash 4.16 2.17 2.55 
Total 18.13 13.74 13.88 
Per hectare (Kgs) 438 235 308 
Note: *- Anticipated 

Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5.
 
potash fertilizers further adds to the inadvertent 
promotion of imbalance in fertilizer use on the 
one hand and excessive use of nitrogenous fertilize
r on 
the other hand, leading to environmental pollution 
and 
lowering of profits to the farmers. The crop- wise 

consumption revealed that    paddy alone accounted 
for 
more than 50 percent of the total fertilizer consum
ption in 
the State.   
The average per hectare 
fertilizer consumption in the State 

declined from 438 kgs in 2011-12 

to 235 kgs in 2012-13.  In 2013-

14, it is expected to be  of the 

order of 308 kgs.  The all-India 

average consumption of fertilizers 

remained stable at 144 kgs per 

ha in 2011-12 when compared to 

the previous year. Very high 

variability was observed in 

fertilizer consumption among the 

districts.  Across the State, it was 

the highest in Madurai (669 Kgs) 

and lowest in Tiruppur (7 kg) 

districts in 2012-13.   
 The major constraints for adopting rational crop nu
trition schedules are (a) high cost
 of straight fertilizers of nutrients other than NPK
 and Zinc; (b) lack of strong policy support 
from the Government of India for balanced fertilize
r use and (c) lack of awareness among the 
farmers. 
 The Government is strictly monitoring the quality o
f the fertilizers through 14 Fertilizer 
Control Laboratories.  During 2012-13, a total of 1
6,540 samples were tested of which 436 
samples were found sub-standard.  It was programmed
 to analyze 17,500 fertilizer samples 
during 2013-14.   
  
 Micro nutrients are best applied through 

fortification of major fertilizers.  They have a 

significant impact on plant growth and life.  A 

total quantity of  1,626 tonnes of micro nutrients 

were produced in 2012-13 and  1,392 tonnes 

were supplied.  In 2013-14, it was programmed 

to produce 1,600 tonnes and to distribute entire 

quantity.  The crop -wise micro nutrient 

distribution during 2012-13 reveals that paddy 

accounted for 68.3 percent followed by coconut 

(10.6%), groundnut (6.6%) cotton and millets 

(4.4% each) and pulses (3.4%) and the rest being ot
her crops.  
Table No. 4. 17 : Per Hectare Fertilizer Consumptio
n (NPK)  
in 2012-13  (Kgs/ha) Provisional 
District above the State level  District below the 
State level 
1.  Madurai 669 1.  Thiruvarur 224 
2.  Tiruchirappalli  659 2.  Dindigul 220 
3.  Erode 519 3.  Sivagangai 214 
4.  Salem 514 4.  Karur 196 
5.  Theni 498 5.  Cuddalore  177 
6.  Kancheepuram 366 6.  Nagapattinam 175 
7.  Vellore 356 7.  Ariyalur 166 
8.  Tirunelveli 335 8.  Perambalur 157 
9.  Coimbatore  330 9.  Thoothukudi 112 
10.Pudukkottai 321 10. Dharmapuri 98 
11.Thiruvallur 313 11. Ramanadhapuram 88 
12.Thanjavur 272 12. Kanniyakumari 76 
13.Thiruvannamalai 251 13. Namakkal 66 
14. Villuppuram  246 14. The Nilgiris 55 
15.Virudhunagar 237 15. Krishnagiri 55 
  16. Tiruppur 7 
State 
235 
Source:  Compiled and Computed from the data obtain
ed from 
Department of Agriculture Œ Chennai-5 
Table No. 4.18    Distribution of Micro Nutrients 
(tonnes) 
Crop 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Paddy 736.4 950.2 906.7 
Groundnut 0.06 91.6 28.7 
Millets 258.7 61.3 45.5 
Cotton 1.00 61.6 11.8 
Coconut 85.3 147.7 121.9 
Pulses 13.5 46.9 20.5 
Others 758.9 32.5 6.8 
Total 1853.9 1391.8 1141.8 
Source: Department of Agriculture, Chennai Œ 5. 

A total quantity of 2,380 tonnes of bio-fertilizers
 was produced from the 15 centres out 
of which 2,180 tonnes were distributed to cover 4.8
8 lakh hectares benefitting 3.45 lakh 
farmers in 2012-13. In 2013-14, it is proposed to p
roduce and distribute 3,850 tonnes of bio-
fertilizers in the State.  
 Comprehensive and authentic database on micro nutri
ent/bio- fertilizer production and 
distribution in the State by public and private sec
tors needs to be built up for the benefit of all 
the stakeholders. With a view to ensure availabilit
y of true to type of micro nutrient/bio 
fertilizers to farmers; to curb sale of spurious an
d poor quality produce; to protect the rights of 
farmers; and to increase private participation in p
roduction and distribution, quality control 
needs to be enforced with utmost urgency on par wit
h international standards. 
 4.10.4 Integrated Pest Management: 
  The protection of crops from predations of pests a
nd diseases is a sine qua non for 
higher agricultural productivity, increased farm in
comes and enhanced food security for the 
nation.  Anecdotal evidence revealed that there is 
a production loss up to 30 percent due to 
incursion of pests and diseases. With the primary o
bjective of reducing the use of harmful 
pesticides and integrating as many non-chemical met
hods, Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) has been implemented in a cost-effective mann
er since late 1980s in the State.  It 
emphasizes promoting eco-friendly, bio-pesticide te
chnology at the field level.  Consequent to 
the implementation of IPM Technology and the fall i
n area cultivated, the technical grade 
material consumption in the State which was 10,926 
tonnes in 1984-85 drastically come 
down to 2,261 tonnes in 2011-12 and further to 2,20
7 tonnes in 2012-13.  Between these two 
years it is noteworthy that use of chemical pestici
des in the State declined from 385 grams 
per hectare to 375 grams per hectare.  Compared to 
the global average of 500 grams of 
technical grade pesticide per hectare it was on the
 low side.  The chemical pesticides are 
sold through 11,093 retail outlets of which 89.0 pe
rcent were in the private sector, 8.0 percent 
in the Government sector and 3.0 percent co-operati
ves.  Consequent to the decline in area 
cropped due to widespread drought, the total area t
reated under various plant protection 
measures had come down to 35.72 lakh hectares in 20
12-13 as against 38.30 lakh hectares 
in the previous year.  Of the total area treated, p
addy accounted for 42.0 percent followed by 
millets (19.0%), pulses (15.0%), sugarcane and grou
ndnut (10.0% each) and cotton (4.0%).    
 Certain special initiatives that can be taken up fo
r the effective implementation of IPM 
so as to produce safe and clean agricultural produc
e in a cost effective manner include: (a) 
training farmers on IPM Technology and educating th
em about the ill effects of indiscriminate 
use of pesticides; (b) encouraging the private sect
or to produce bio-pesticides; (c) regulating 
the sale of chemical pesticides and preventing misu
se; (d) developing indigenous and cost 
effective pheromones; and (e) ensuring availability
 of critical inputs  in right time.   
 4.10.5 Crop Insurance:  
 With a view to insulate the 
farmers against the loss occurred due 

to natural calamities, large scale 

outbreak of pests and diseases and 

to ensure credit worthiness for  the 

ensuing season,  the Agricultural  

Insurance Company of  India Limited   

implements  the National  Agricultural Insurance Sc
heme in the State.  The unit of insurance 
under the scheme is block depending on the area und
er the crop notified.  Under the 
Table No. 4.19    Crop Insurance 
Particulars 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Farmers Covered (Lakhs) 4.89 10.83 0.09 
Sum Insured (Rs. Crores) 1686 3402 0.46 
Area Covered  

(lakh Hectares) 
7.03 12.35 0.15 
Claims Paid (Rs  Crores)  40 744 -- 
Farmers Benefitted (Lakhs) 0.42 5.57 -- 
Source: Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limi
ted  
Chennai-1 

scheme, the total number of farmers insured their c
rops in the State increased from 4.89 
lakhs in 2011-12 to 10.83 lakhs in 2012-13.   The t
otal area insured under the scheme had 
gone up from 7.03 lakh hectares in 2011-12 to 12.35
 lakh hectares in 2012-13 with the total 
sum insured at Rs.1,686 crores and Rs.3,402 crores 
respectively.  In 2013-14 (up to 
October), 0.15 lakh hectares were insured for a sum
 Rs.46 crores.  Of the total area covered, 
paddy, banana, black gram, sugarcane and maize toge
ther accounted for more than 90  
percent  in both  the years.  Claims to the tune of
 Rs.40 crore were paid to benefit 0.42 lakh 
farmers in 2011-12 and Rs. 744 crore to 5.57 lakh f
armers in 2012-13.  Research to evolve 
location specific insurance products and enhancing 
insurance education for the small and 
marginal farmers is the need of the hour.    
 The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme stipulat
es the premium level of 2.0 
percent to 3.5 percent of the sum insured.  Of this
, the State has extended 50 percent 
premium subsidy enabling the farmers only to pay 1.
0 percent to 1.75 percent of the sum 
insured. The Government of India has introduced a n
ew National Crop Insurance Scheme 
(NCIS) with two components ﬁModified National Agric
ultural Insurance Schemeﬂ and 
ﬁWeather Based Crop Insurance Schemeﬂ from Rabi 201
3-14 onwards by withdrawing  the 
National Agricultural Insurance Scheme. Under the n
ew Modified National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme which is implemented in all distri
cts from Rabi 2013-14, the premium 
payable by the farmers increases to 3.75 percent.  
With a view to encourage the farmers to 
adopt the agricultural crop insurance on a large sc
ale so as to enable them to mitigate the 
crop losses and continue their agricultural operati
ons in a sustainable manner, the State 
Government has made a strong plea to the Central Go
vernment to equally share the 
increased commitment on premium for the farmers ove
r and above 2.0 percent of the sum 
insured.   
 4.10.6 Institutional Credit: 
  Timely availability of credit 
at reasonable rates especially to 

small and marginal farmers is 

crucial for agricultural growth.  

Public sector banks, co-operative 

banks and regional rural banks 

play an important role in meeting 

the entire crop loans needs in the 

State.  Of the total credit disbursed 

by the above institutions, the share 

of the farm sector increased from 

53.7 percent in 2011-12 to 60.3 

percent in 2012-13. The quantum 

of crop loan disbursed in the State 

by these institutions steadily increased from Rs. 3
4,432 crore in 2011-12 to Rs. 51,991 crore 
in 2012-13 (51.0%).  It was planned to disburse cro
p loans to the tune of Rs. 48,657 crores in 
2013-14.  Of the total crop loan disbursed, paddy, 
plantation and horticulture crops together 
accounted for a sizable share of about 72.0 percent
 in both the years.  During 2012-13 in 
respect of paddy, oil seeds, turmeric, sugarcane an
d plantation and horticulture crops the 
disbursement of crop credit exceeded the respective
 targets. 
 A meagre 4.0 percent of the total institutional cre
dit for the farm sector had been 
utilized for infrastructure development viz., minor
 irrigation (Rs. 859 crore), land development 
Table No. 4.20 Disbursement of Institutional Crop L
oan  
(Rs crores) 
 Crops 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2013-14 
(Target) 
Target Achieve 
1. Crop Loan  
Paddy 8735 13456 15029 9602 
Millets 32 152 20 209 
Oil Seeds 3074 3859 5116 6649 
Pulses 178 299 127 413 
Cotton 413 601 405 763 
Tobacco 87 39 5 46 
Turmeric 2839 2745 3716 3786 
Sugarcane 3047 4358 4529 5485 
Horticulture crops* 16027 14323 23044 21704 
Total 34432 39832 51991 48657 
2. Total Farm Sector 37366 52326 58289 65647 
Total Institutional credit 
 69553 91325 96661 115076 
Note : * includes plantation 

Source: State Level Bankers™  Committee,  IOB, Chen
nai - 2 

(Rs.404 crore), farm mechanization (Rs.1,119 crore)
 and storage/market yard (Rs. 190 crore) 
in 2012-13.   
 Vast extent of agricultural lands is given on lease
 for small and marginal 
farmers/agricultural labourers due to migration of 
land owners, labour problems and other 
reasons.  These tenant farmers are not able to secu
re credit from banks and have to depend 
on informal sources of credit for taking up cultiva
tion.  There is need for bringing them into 
banking fold and facilitate provision of credit for
 farming operations.   
 4.10.7 Agriculture Marketing: 
 Owing to a number of factors such as inadequate sto
rage facilities, lack of quick and 
economical means of transportation, perishability o
f farm produce, poor withholding capacity 
of the farmers and urgent credit needs, the unorgan
ized sector comprising wholesale 
merchants, commission agents and other intermediari
es continue to dominate the sphere of 
agricultural marketing in the State.  With the 

aim to create infrastructure and to regulate 

agricultural produce trade activities, the State 

Government enacted the Tamil Nadu 

Agricultural Marketing (Regulation) Act 1987 

and Rules 1991 replacing the earlier Act of 

1959.   At present, 21 Marketing Committees 

are functioning at the district level.  Under their
 
control, 277 Regulated Markets are functioning 

in the State. Among them 66.0 percent 
transacted business of 5,000 metric tonnes per annu
m, 18.0 percent 2,000 to 5,000 mt of 
produce and 16.0 percent less than 2,000 mt per ann
um. The total number of licensed 
traders engaged in the transaction of agricultural 
produce in the regulated markets increased 
from 27,620 in 2011-12 to 28,253 in 2012-13.   Due 
to the wide spread drought, the total 
quantum of agricultural produce transacted in the r
egulated markets fell from 18.97 lakh 
tonnes in 2011-12 to 17.43 lakh tonnes in 2012-13. 
 With the prevailing favourable 
agricultural scenario in the State during 2013-14, 
it was programmed to transact 27.30 lakh 
tonnes.  The total value of agricultural commoditie
s transacted by these regulated markets 
during 2012-13 was Rs.3, 116 crore, of which food c
rops accounted for a major share of 68.0 
percent and the remaining being non-food crops.  Up
to the end of October 2013, the total 
value of transactions stood at Rs. 1,508 crore.  
  Grading of agricultural commodities has three main
 purposes, namely, (a) to promote 
common trade language and avoid the need for physic
al checking and handling at many 
points; (b) to protect consumers by ensuring qualit
y of product purchases; and (c) to protect 
the producer from exploitation by ensuring prices c
ommensurate to the quality of produce. 
Total quantum of agricultural produce graded in the
 State increased from 2.59 lakh tonnes in 
2011-12 to 3.0 lakh tonnes in 2012-13.   
 Market information is an important tool in the agri
cultural marketing system. 189 
regulated markets upload prevailing agricultural pr
oduce price and arrivals on an electronic 
portal on a daily basis.  Apart from this, 179 farm
ers™ markets had also disseminated price 
details.  To minimize the loss after harvest during
 drying, cleaning and winnowing, 1,359 
village level drying yards were constructed at a to
tal cost of Rs. 27.35 crore.   Four Agri 
Export Zones were established in the PPP mode at Ho
sur, Ooty, Nilakottai and Panruti to 
facilitate value addition for agricultural products
 and to minimize post-harvest losses. It 
ensures steady and better price  realization  to th
e farming community as well as availability 
Table No. 4.21
  
Value of Agricultural Produce 
Transacted through Regulated Markets 
(Rs. Crores)
 Commodities
 2012
-13
 2013
-14 * 
 Cereals 1670.50 653.24 
Pulses 117.20 55.71 
Other food crops 156.99 36.51 
Others 162.97 124.89 
Non food crops 1008.20 637.90 
Total 3115.88 1508.27 
Note: * Upto Oct™2013  

Source: Department of Agricultural Marketing and 

Agri-business, Chennai-32.   

of commodities in processed  form  to the  consumer
s throughout the year.   The total 
turnover of these zones during 2012-13 was Rs. 3.01
 crore.  
 In the co-operative fold, 110 Primary Co-
operative Marketing Societies transacted 

agricultural produce of a total value of Rs.552 

crore in 2012-13.  Up to October 2013, the total 

value of transaction was Rs. 163 crore.  Of the 

total value of transaction cotton alone accounted 

for a sizable share of 44.0 percent.  
 Food and agricultural commodity prices are 
primarily determined by domestic demand and 

supply factors.  Consequently, there is a wide gap 

between the prices received by the farmers and 

the prices paid by the consumer. At times, the farm
ers are not able to receive a price to cover 
the cost of production while the consumers are payi
ng an abnormally high price for the same 
commodity. This is a major concern for the policy m
akers. High food inflation with an 
inadequate supply response, aggravated by logistics
 and market-related constraints are other 
areas requiring attention. Further, to provide a hi
gher share of consumer prices to the 
farmers, there is a need to reduce the multiple lay
ers of intermediaries by providing 
alternative marketing channels.  Creation of scient
ific storages nearer to the farms is 
necessary so as to avoid wastage and produce deteri
oration. Enlarging the scope of 
provision of institutional credit to the farmers th
rough various instruments like pledge 
financing, so that they are not compelled to sell t
he produce at distress price is also 
necessary.  Supply of market information and extens
ion services to advise farmers on 
marketing, capacity-building in marketing; developm
ent of marketing linkages between 
farmers, agribusinesses and large retailers may be 
developed through cooperatives, contract 
farming or associations of stakeholders representin
g different interest groups like farmers, 
input suppliers, agricultural produce processers, e
tc.  
 4.11. Highlights of Major Schemes Implemented in th
e State: 
 The State has taken all efforts to increase agricul
tural production, enhance 
productivity and explore the untapped potential.  T
he Central Government also supplements 
the efforts of the State through implementation of 
Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector 
Schemes.    
 Development of wasteland/degraded land and improvin
g rainfed farming is crucial 
towards attaining self sufficiency in crop producti
on.  Towards achieving this goal, various 
area and location specific programmes viz., Drought
 Prone Area Programme (DPAP), 
Integrated Wasteland Development Programme (IWDP), 
Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP), National Watershed Development Pr
oject for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) 
are being implemented in the State over a period of
 time on watershed basis with the 
participatory approach. During 2012-13, the total a
rea treated under these programmes was 
1.47 lakh hectares at a cost of Rs. 186.13 crores. 
    With a view to improve the yield rate and product
ion of rice,  System of Rice 
Intensification (SRI) is being implemented in the S
tate.  During 2012-13, it had  adopted  the 
whole  village  concept in 1,719  villages covering
 an area of 1.68 lakh  hectares.  During 
2013-14, the scheme would be implemented in 2,000 v
illages covering an area of 1.90 lakh 
hectares.  
Tabl
e No. 4.22  Value of Agricultural Produce 
sold by Marketing Co-operative Societies 
 (Rs. Crores) 
Commodities 2012-13 
2013
-14
  ( upto Oct 2013) 
Foodgrains 20.14 3.35 
Cotton 241.95 30.01 
Spices 91.19 17.75 
Oilseeds 73.78 11.34 
Chilies 4.49 0.74 
Others 120.35 99.40 
Total 551.90 162.59 
Source: Registrar of Co-operative Marketing,  

Chennai -   10. 

To enhance the production of rice and pulses on mis
sion mode approach, the 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is implemente
d since 2007-08.  Under the scheme 
Rs.22.87 crores was spent during 2012-13 towards pr
omotion of rice in five districts viz., 
Thiruvarur, Nagapattinam, Sivagangai, Pudukkottai a
nd Ramanathapuram. Under this 
programme,  it was contemplated to improve pulses p
roduction in all districts except Chennai 
and The Nilgiris.  Various activities were taken up
 at a cost of Rs. 14.76 crores.   
 With the aim to increase productivity of oilseeds, 
pulses, oil palm and maize, the 
Integrated Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm an
d Maize (ISOPOM) is implemented since 
2004-05 with region specific strategies.  From 2010
-11 onwards, since pulses have been 
integrated with the NFSM, ISOPOM scheme was  implem
ented only for oilseeds, oil palm 
and maize at a cost of Rs.18.51 crores  during 2012
-13.   
 Under National Mission on Micro Irrigation, instill
ation of sprinkler irrigation for 
sugarcane, cotton, maize, pulses, groundnut and hor
ticultural crops is taken up.  During 
2012-13 this scheme has been implemented by Tamil N
adu Horticulture Development 
Agency (TANHODA) at a cost of Rs. 135.34 crores ben
efiting an area of 26,538 hectares.  It 
has been proposed to cover 47,800 hectare at an out
lay of Rs. 372.84 crores in 2013-14.  
Under the World Bank aided programme IAMWARM, crop 
demonstration, distribution of 
agricultural implements, farmers training and capac
ity building are being taken up at an 
outlay of Rs. 98.00 crore.  The total expenditure i
ncurred upto 2012-13 was Rs. 81.27 crores.  
   
With the success in achieving an increase of 30 Œ 5
0 percent in productivity due to 
adoption of high yielding/hybrid seeds, micro irrig
ation and fertigation in vegetables, turmeric, 
banana, precision farming is successfully implement
ed from 2008 onwards.  During 2012-13, 
at 50 percent subsidy, it was implemented at a cost
 of Rs. 9.25 crore benefiting 4,961 
hectares.   
 For promotion of horticulture in rainfed area, Rain
fed Area Development Programme 
(RADP) was implemented in 2,655 acres at a cost of 
Rs. 8.79 crores during 2012-13.  
  
Towards augmenting mechanization in agriculture und
er National Agricultural 
Development Programme (NADP) subsidy assistance to 
individual farmers for purchasing 
agricultural machinery so as to take up timely sowi
ng, transplanting, weeding, plant protection 
and harvesting and to overcome the acute farm worke
rs scarcity during 2012-13 total subsidy 
assistance of Rs. 73.45 crore was provided to the f
armers for purchasing 41,328 machineries 
for agriculture purposes.     
   
4.12. A Way Forward:  
  To meet the growing demand for agricultural produce
 and to ensure food security, the 
following measures are proposed:-  
  For achieving a farm output growth of 5 percent, i
ncremental productivity gains and 
technology diffusion are imperative.   
 Agriculture growth targeted in the Five Year Plans
 has often not been achieved due to 
high degree of uncertainty of the monsoon.  In this
 context, dry land farming, crop 
diversification and conservation of water through p
recision farming and waste land 
development are indispensible.   
 For nutritional security, special thrust is requir
ed for higher production and productivity 
level in pulses, oilseeds and fruits and vegetables
.  
 Sufficient public sector investment in agriculture
 sector is central to agricultural planning.  

 Ground water is still perceived as individual prop
erty and is exploited inequitably and 
without any consideration to sustainability.  It le
ads to over exploitation.  This needs to be 
properly regulated.   
 Existing resource infrastructure is not 
being properly maintained resulting in 

under utilization of available resources. 

Maintenance of existing water bodies 

may be assigned top most priority. Local 

bodies as well as stakeholders should be 

involved in the process.    
 Encroachment and diversion of water 
bodies must not be allowed and 

wherever it has taken place it should be 

restored to the extent feasible.   
 Water Users Associations should be 
given statutory power to collect and 

retain a portion of water charges and 

maintain the distribution system in their 

jurisdiction.    
 A higher proportion of farmers rely on farm-saved 
seeds leading to low seed replacement 
rate.  It is desirable to achieve the required and 
recommended seed replacement rate to 
accomplish higher production and productivity. 
 There is skewness in the application of chemical f
ertilizers (NPK).  There is overdose of 
nitrogenous and limited doses of phosphotic and pot
ash fertilizers application.  Farmers 
are to be educated enough to apply balanced applica
tion of fertilizers.  It required 
appropriate price incentives.   
 Cost-effective and productivity-enhancing System o
f Rice Intensification is to be 
implemented with efficacy and pragmatism. 
 Reforms in extension services are needed to ensure
 smooth transfer of agriculture 
technology and information to the farming communiti
es.    
 Exhaustion of yield potential of high yielding var
ieties in rice is to be overcome. 
 Post harvest value addition is to be improved and 
upgraded with adequate public 
investment.   
 Efficient markets with a dynamic supply chain is i
ndispensable for the development of the 
agricultural sector.   
 With respect to horticulture, marketing initiative
s are to be taken to promote modern 
terminal markets for fruits, vegetable and other pe
rishables in the important urban 
centres. The terminal markets will operate on a hub
-and-spoke format wherein the 
terminal markets are linked to a number of collecti
on centres located in key production 
centres to allow easy access to farmers for marketi
ng of their produce. 
 There are wide yield gaps across the State.  Agric
ulture production can be substantially 
increased if the yield gap will be addressed proper
ly through technological and policy 
intervention.   
 Awareness on crop insurance among the farmers may 
be enhanced.  
 To sum up, agriculture development is predicated by
 improvement in farm production 
and productivity, better utilization of agriculture
 inputs, proper marketing infrastructure and 
support, stepping up of investment in agriculture w
ith due regard and environmental concerns 
and efficient food management.   

  Strategies of Tamil Nadu Vision 2023 
 The Tamil Nadu Vision 2023 has a three pronged stra
tegies 
for improving productivity and thereby sustaining g
rowth in 
agriculture production so as to meet the growing de
mand for 
the agricultural produce and as well as ensuring fo
od security.  
The Strategies are: 
· Improving productivity by introducing scientific 

agricultural methods and building an institutional 

network to support the continued adoption of the sa
me. 
· Ensuring timely irrigation by intelligent use of ava
ilable 
water by adopting effective recharging mechanisms, 

drip/sprinkler irrigation systems, timely cleaning 
and 
deepening of tanks and canals, and adopting 

appropriate cropping pattern based on water 

availability. 
· Developing suitable post harvest infrastructure to 

maximize the benefits of value addition and timely 

marketing of produce.  The State will also extend 

agricultural extension activities to cover the enti
re 
farming community. 
 Source: Vision Tamil Nadu 2023, Government of  
Tamil Nadu,  (Page No.24) 
  
   Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development    Final Report     November 30,  2004 
    
   Tamil Nadu Agricultural Development    Final Report     November 30,  2004 
    ACRONYMS 
 AAY Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
MSP Minimum Support Price 
AP Andhra Pradesh NDDB National Dairy Development Board APL  Above poverty line 
NPC Nominal Protection Coefficient 
BPL Below poverty line NSS National Sample Survey 
DOA Department of Agriculture O&M Operation and Maintenance DPAP Drought Prone Area's Programme 
PCMS Primary Co-operative Marketing 
Societies GCA Gross Cropped Area PDS Public Distribution System 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
SGDP State Gross Domestic Product GFCF Gross Fixed Capital Formation TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System 
GoI Government of India T&V Training and Visitation 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
TNAU Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
FCI Food Corporation of India 
TNERC Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory 

Commission 
FMIS Farmer Management of Irrigation 
Systems 
WRO Water Resources Organization 
IMT Irrigation Management Transfer 
WUA Water Users' Association 
 Unit Measurements
       
 
   
 ft           feet 
Ha         hectare 
hp         horse power 
kg      kilogram 
 Kwh           kilowatt hour 
mt            metric ton 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Executive Summary..............................................................................................................
.........iv 1. Introduction...................................................................................................................
..........1 2. Overview.......................................................................................................................
..........6 Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu...........................................................................................
6 Major Crops....................................................................................................................
.............8 Output Price Incentives: Nominal Rates of Protection for Major Commodities.......................
13 Agricultural Inputs: Fertilizer Use and Mechanization.............................................................
14 Land...........................................................................................................................
................15 Livestock......................................................................................................................
.............17 Fisheries......................................................................................................................
...............18 The Rural Non-farm Sector......................................................................................................
.18 3. Water for Agriculture..........................................................................................................
..22 Water Resources................................................................................................................
........22 Overview of  Water Use in Agriculture.....................................................................................23 Rainfed Agriculture............................................................................................................
...24 Irrigated Agriculture..........................................................................................................
....26 Institutions...................................................................................................................
..............27 Water and Electricity Charges..................................................................................................
.29 Technology.....................................................................................................................
...........39 Environmental Management.....................................................................................................
40 4. Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension...................................................................
41 Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Irrigation....................................................................
41 Tamil Nadu™s Public Distribution System.................................................................................
43 Agricultural Extension...............................................................................................................45 5. Agricultural Markets and Market Policies.............................................................................50 Market Structure: Regulated and Private Markets....................................................................
50 Rice Markets...................................................................................................................
...........52 Markets for Sugar Cane and Milk.............................................................................................
56 Commodity Marketing Boards..................................................................................................
57 Contract Farming...............................................................................................................
........57 Rural Infrastructure...........................................................................................................
........58 6. Agricultural Growth and Rural Poverty................................................................................
60 Rural Poverty..................................................................................................................
...........60 Labor Markets..................................................................................................................
.........62 Technological Change and  Rural Poverty................................................................................
64 7. Conclusions and Policy Options............................................................................................
66 Increasing the Efficiency of Water Use.....................................................................................
66 Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension....................
70 Promoting the Development of Well Functioning Agricultural Markets..................................
71 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor.........................................................................
72 8. References.....................................................................................................................
........74  This report was prepared by a team led by Paul Dorosh and Mona Sur, with contributions from S.Rajagopal 
(water/irrigation), Jyoti Sriram (Bt Cotton),  C. Rama
samy  (Consultant, Tamil Nadu Agricultural Background 
Study), Burt Swanson (Consultant, agricultural research 
and extension), P.N. Mathur (Consultant,  agricultural 
research and extension).  Lili Liu, Dina Umali-Dein
inger and K. Palinisami (TNAU)  provided  valuable 
comments on various drafts.  Peer 
reviewers for the study are Derek Byerlee (Lead Economist, ARD), Peter 
Hazell (International Food Policy Research Institute) an
d S. Mahendra Dev (Centre for Economic and Social 
Studies, Hyderabad). 
 ii Table of Figures Figure 1.1:  Sectoral Contributions to GDP, 1980-2000.................................................................
1 Figure 2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu............................................................................
6 Figure 2.2:  Distribution of Gross Cropped Area by Crop..............................................................
8 Figure 2.3:  Irrigated Area by Crop (1999-2000)............................................................................
8 Figure 2.4:  Growth in Fisheries SGDP.........................................................................................
18 Figure 2.5:  Non-farm Income Share in Rural Tamil Nadu, 1993/94............................................
19 Figure 2.6:  Employment and Earnings 
in Khadi and Village Industries, 2000/01.......................
20 Figure 2.7:  Value Added in the Agro-Processing Sector by Industry..........................................
21 Figure 3.1:  Rainfall and Agricultural & Allied GSDP.................................................................
22 Figure 3.2:  Area Cultivated by 
Share of Irrigated Land Per Farm...............................................
24 Figure 3.3:  Net Irrigated Ar
ea by Source of Irrigation.................................................................
26 Figure 3.4:  Irrigation Costs for Rice Cultivation in India (Rs 1999-2000/ha).............................
40 Figure 3.5:  Irrigation Costs and Gross Profits for Rice Cultivation in India................................
40 Figure 4.1: Total Expenditures (Capital a
nd Revenue) on Agriculture and Irrigation..................
41 Figure 4.2:  Gross Fixed Capital 
Formation (GFCF) in Agriculture.............................................
42 Figure 5.1:  Rice Prices in Chennai 1994:  2003...........................................................................
54 Figure 6.1:  Productivity and Rural Poverty..................................................................................
61 Figure 6.2:  Real Paddy Prices and 
Rural Wage Rates in Tamil Nadu.........................................
63 Figure 7.1:  Alternatives for Public-Private Fi
nancing and Provision of Extension Services.......
71 Table of Tables Table 1.1:  Population, Labor Force and Ag
riculture in Tamil Nadu and Other States..................
2 Table 2.1:  Agro-climatic
 Zones of Tamil Nadu.............................................................................
7 Table 2.2:  Gross Area Cultivated and Cropping 
Patterns by Agro-ecological Zone   (2001-02)..
7 Table 2.3:  Area and Share of Gross Cropped Area (GCA) by Crop............................................
10 Table 2.4:   Growth rates of real
 Market Prices of Major Commodities.......................................
10 Table 2.5:  Tamil Nadu: Share of Area Cultivat
ed by Agro-ecological Zone for Major Crops....
11 Table 2.6:   Distribution of Gross Irrigated Area by Major Crops (1999-2000)...........................
11 Table 2.7:  Growth Rates in Area, 
Yields and Production:
 1980s and 1990s...............................
13 Table 2.8:  Nominal Protection Coefficients
 for Major Crops in 
Tamil Nadu, 1980-2002...........
14 Table 2.9:  Characteristics of Agriculture in Various States (1998)..............................................
15 Table 2.10:  Land Distributi
on in Tamil Nadu, 1995-96...............................................................
16 Table 2.11:  Employment by Major Agro-processing Industries, 1989/90-1996/97.....................
20 Table 2.12: Value Added in the Agro-processing 
Sector by Major Agro-processing Industries, 
1989/90-1997/98  (Rs Billion in constant 1993/94 Rupees).................................................
21 Table 3.1:  Rainfall in Tamil Nadu.............................................................................................
...23 Table 3.2:  Access to Irrigation by Farms.....................................................................................
24 Table 3.3:  Irrigation Expenditur
es and Revenues (1998/99-2000/01).........................................
30 Table 3.4:  Distribution of Canal Irrigati
on Subsidies in Tamil Nadu  (2001/02).........................
31 Table 3.5:  Distribution of Agricultural Power Subsidies in Tamil Nadu (2001/02)....................
32 Table 3.6:  Irrigation Costs by Crop and Type of Irrigation..........................................................
36 Table 3.7:  Financial and Economic Retu
rns by Crop and Type of Irrigation..............................
38 Table 3.8:  Estimated Input Subsidies fo
r Various Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2000-01......................
39 Table 4.1:  Breakdown of Expenditures on 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1997-2001).........
42 Table 4.2:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Costs of Rice Procurement....
46 Table 4.3:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Fiscal Costs of Rice Distribution
...............................................................................................................................................47  iiiTable 5.1:  Marketed Surplus and Market Cha
nnels of Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2001-02....
52 Table 5.2: Estimated Net Trade in Rice for Ta
mil Nadu (thousand tons), 1997/98 - 2002/03.....
53 Table 5.3:  Estimates of Marketing Channels 
for Major Crops (Percentage of Farm Sales)........
55 Table 6.1:  Poverty Estimates for Tamil Nadu  (1999/2000)........................................................
60 Table 6.2:  Farm Income Shares in Tamil Nadu............................................................................
62 Table 6.3:  Real rural wages in Tamil Nadu, 1986-2001..............................................................
63 Table 7.1:  Selected Country Experiences with Agricultural Subsidy Reform.............................
69 Table of Text Boxes Text Box 2.1:  Bt Cotton in Tamil Nadu ......................................................................................
12 Text Box 3.1:  Pro-poor Irri
gation Management Transfer............................................................
29 Text Box 4.1:  The ATMA Approach to Extension......................................................................
49 Text Box 5.1:  Contract farming in Tamil Nadu: New Initiatives for Rice...................................
59 Text Box 7.1:  Pilot Initiatives in Reforming Power Supply to Farmers......................................
68 Text Box 7.2:  Contract Farming in Punjab...................................................................................
72 Text Box 7.3:  Role of Government in Agro
-Food System and Agro-Enterprise Development..
73 Text Box 7.4:  Promoting the Rural non-farm
 Economy: Lessons from Latin America and the 
Caribbean......................................................................................................................
.........73  ivTAMIL NADU 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY Achievements and Challenges in Tamil Nadu Agriculture 
 (i) Agriculture in Tamil Nadu has enjoyed thre
e decades of growth based largely on 
rapid technological change. Food security has also increased due
 to rapid increases in food grain 
output, sales from the Public Distribution System (supplied by Food Corporation of India stocks), 
targeted feeding and employment programs, and we
ll-functioning rice markets that have enabled  
price-stabilizing inflows of rice from neighboring 
states in years of local production shortfalls. 
Partly because of agricultural growth, rural pove
rty rates declined from 38.5 percent to 24.3 
percent between 1993/94 and 1999/2000 (Deaton a
nd Drèze estimates). The state™s agriculture 
has a strong base for continued growth in term
s of a strong agricultural research system, an 
extensive road network, and a relatively well-educated rural labor force.  
(ii) While agricultural sector growth rates in Tamil Nadu were among the highest in 
India during the 1980s and early 1990s, decelerati
on in growth since the mid-1990s is of 
increasing concern to policymakers
. During the 1980s agricultural GSDP grew at 3.4 percent, 
exceeding the all-India agricultural growth of 2.9 
percent. Adequate rainfall contributed to even 
higher growth in the early 1990s: between 1989/90 
and 1994/95 agriculture grew by 7.2 percent 
in Tamil Nadu, compared with 3.1 percent in 
all of India. But between 1994/95 and 1999/2000 
agriculture in Tamil Nadu suffered from severe cons
ecutive droughts and grew only 1.3 percent a 
year, compared with 2.9 percent for all of India. 
As a result, the state™s agricultural growth rate 
during the 1990s was only 2.9 percent a year, compared with 3.2 percent for all of India.  
(iii) Faster growth in agriculture is central to rural development and poverty reduction 
in Tamil Nadu. Although agriculture accounts for only 15.7 percent of total GSDP, farm income 
accounts for about half of household income for 35 million people (56 percent of the state™s 
population) who live in rural areas. Much of this 
rural population is poor, with estimates ranging 
from 7.4 million people (20.6 percent of the rural 
population) to 11.4 million (31.8 percent of the 
rural population). For the poorest rural quintile 
(approximately 1.5 million households, or 7.5 
million people), more than three-quarters of income
 is derived from agriculture, with agricultural 
wage labor alone accounting for half of household income. Given the importance of agriculture in 
the incomes of the poor in Tamil Nadu, growth in
 labor-intensive agriculture could further reduce 
rural poverty through higher yields to small produ
cers, higher real wages to agricultural laborers, 
and increased income and employment opportunities with forward and backward links to the rural 

nonfarm sector.    
(iv) Traditional sources of growth in agricultu
re face major constraints such as growing 
water scarcity, increasing land degradation, dec
lining farm sizes, and rising costs of labor
. Tamil Nadu is one of the driest states in India, 
averaging only 925 millimeters of rainfall a year. 
The state™s dry season lasts five months (January through May) even in good years, and severe 
droughts occur in 3 of 10 years, severely lim
iting cultivation of crops between June and 
September. Per capita availability of water res
ources in Tamil Nadu is only 900 cubic meters a 
year, compared with 2,200 cubic meters for a
ll of India. Irrigation through a combination of 
canals, wells, and tanks
1 increases the reliability and availab
ility of water for farming and is 
                                                     
 1 A tank is a small-scale surface water reservoir constr
ucted on a gentle slope, designed so that water flows 
out of the tank through the force of gravity.  
 vessential for cultivating crops in much of the state.
 But the seasonality and scarcity of supply limit 
cultivation to only one crop per plot for most of the state.
2 The agricultural sector faces increasing 
competition for water from industry and domestic 
users and intensifying interstate competition 
for surface water resources. In many parts of the 
state, the rate of extraction of groundwater has 
exceeded recharge rates, contributing to falling 
water tables. Water quality is also a growing 
concern. Effluents discharged from industries and 
heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers have had 
a major impact on surface water quality, soils, and groundwater.   
(v) Agricultural land resources have also come
 under increasing pressure because of 
rapid population growth and urbanization
. Between 1971/72 and 1997/98 the available 
cultivable land per rural resident declined fro
m 0.22 hectares per capita to 0.15 hectares per 
capita. The growing pressures on land, skewed 
pricing policies, and rural poverty have all 
contributed to land and soil degradation. As a r
esult, poor soil fertility, salinity, water logging, 
overgrazing, and deforestation are growing pr
oblems and pose serious constraints to the 
performance of the agricultural sector
 in some parts of the state. (vi) Seasonal labor shortages and rising real agricultural wages during the past two 
decades, in part caused by rapid rural-urban migration, have contributed to higher incomes 
for agricultural laborers, but make future agric
ultural growth more difficult by reducing 
the competitiveness of Tamil Nadu™s agriculture vis-à-vis other agricultural producers
. Higher labor costs, due in part to rapid growth in demand for nonagricultural labor, have 
increased the cost of cultivation, especially fo
r labor-intensive crops. In 1999Œ2000 rural wages 
for male agricultural labor in the kharif season in
 Tamil Nadu averaged Rs.62.2 a day, compared 
with only Rs.45.3 a day in Andhra Pradesh and 
Rs.42.8 in Karnataka. These higher labor costs 
encourage mechanized land preparation and harves
ting, but small farm sizes constrain the rate of 
mechanization. 
(vii) Given the constraints, diversification 
into higher value, less water-intensive 
products, such as fruits, vegetables, spices, a
nd livestock products, may be one of the most 
promising sources of agricultural growth
. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions are well 
suited for diversified agricultu
re. Rapidly increasing incomes a
nd changing patterns of food 
demand also provide strong impetus for diversifi
cation. Increased agricultural diversification and private investments in processing for many of
 the higher value agricultural commodities are 
likely to generate new rural nonfarm employment
 opportunities and contribute to higher rural 
incomes.  (viii) Against this background this study assess
es agricultural policies in Tamil Nadu and 
the implications of these policies for future 
agricultural growth, food security, and rural 
poverty reduction, and recommends reform options
. This report focuses on selected critical 
issues rather than a comprehensive review of the 
agricultural sector in the 
state. It analyzes the 
structure of the agricultural economy, water ma
nagement, agricultural subsidies, agricultural 
marketing and regulations, and implications of 
policy reforms for food security and consumption 
of the poor.  

The Structure of Agriculture in Tamil Nadu 
(ix) Rice dominates both food consumption and agricultural production
, accounting for about a third of total gross cropped area and near
ly 60 percent of irrigated area in Tamil Nadu 
(over 90 percent of paddy is irrigated). Pul
ses (18 percent of total cropped area), millet (11 
percent), and groundnuts (10 percent) require less water than rice or sugar cane, and millet and 
pulses are grown almost exclusively on nonirrigated 
land. About 5 percent of total cropped area is 
                                                     
 2 In 1998/99 average cropping intensity was only 1.20 in Tamil Nadu, compared with 1.34 for all of India. 
 videvoted to sugar cane, all of it irrigated (acc
ounting for almost 10 percent of irrigated land). 
Cotton occupies about 3 percent of cropped area, and 
about a third of the cotton crop is irrigated.  
(x) The livestock and fisheries subsectors are also important in Tamil Nadu
. The state 
ranks second among Indian states in egg 
production and ninth in milk production.
3 In 2001/02 
Tamil Nadu accounted for approximately 6 percen
t of national milk production and 11.9 percent 
of egg production. The state is also relatively 
well endowed with fisheries, accounting for 13.2 
percent of total marine fish production and 4 percen
t of in-land fish production in India. In all, 
crop agriculture, livestock, and animal husbandry acc
ount for 92.2 percent of total value added in 
agriculture and allied activities, with fishing 
accounting for 4.5 percent and forestry for 3.3 percent. (xi) The average size of individually held farms is
 only 0.91 hectares, with over half the 
farms smaller than 0.5 hectares
. Nearly three-quarters of farms are smaller than 1 hectare, 
accounting for only 30.2 percent total cultivable land.
 In comparison, the average farm size in 
India is 1.41 hectares, with 62 percent 
of farmers holding less than 1 hectare. 
 
Water for Agriculture 
 (xii) Agriculture is the single largest consumer of
 water in the state, using 75 percent of 
the state™s water
. Despite limited water resources, Tamil Nadu has a high percentage of net sown 
area that is irrigated (54 percent). In 1999/2000 
the state had a net irrigated area of 3 million hectares. Today the state relies equally on surface 
and groundwater sources for irrigation, though 
its reliance on groundwater has been steadily in
creasing. Approximately 30 percent of the net 
irrigated area is watered by canals and 21 percent 
by tanks, while 49 percent is fed by wells. The 
remaining area is irrigated by other sources such as streams and springs. Rainfed agriculture, 
employing approximately 25 percent of farmers, accounts for 46 percent of the net sown area of 

5.5 million hectares. 
Institutional Issues 

(xiii) Institutional weaknesses have undermined 
proper management and development of 
water resources in the state
. As is common in many Indian states, inadequate priority to and 
funding for operations and maintenance led to ra
pid deterioration of surface irrigation. There was 
also minimal involvement of farmers in the opera
tions and maintenance of irrigation systems. But 
recent efforts have been made to address many
 of the issues plaguing the water sector.  
(xiv) The Government of Tamil Nadu is now undertaking 
comprehensive water planning on 
a river basin basis
 and has decentralized water resource management along river basins. In 1995 
the Public Works Department was divided into the 
Water Resources Organization
 (WRO) and 
the Buildings Organization. The WRO is to be fo
rmalized in 2004 as a separate agency with a 
specialized cadre of staff, with
 Chief Engineers reorganized around river basins. The Palar Basin 
Development and Management Board and th
e Thambaraparani Basin Development and 
Management Board were established in January 
of 2000. Preparation of macro-level basin 
development plans and formulation of deci
sion support systems for development and 
management of the water resources of the state have been under way since 1997. The state has 
drafted a Water Policy
, initiated steps for irrigation mana
gement transfer, and passed a 
Groundwater Regulation and Management Act, one of the first states in India to do so. The 
State Legislative Assembly passed the 
Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation 
                                                     
 3 Ranks are computed based on average production in Indian states between 1999 and 2001. 
 viiSystems Bill
 in May 2000. Substantial progress has been
 made in the environmental aspects of 
water resources development. 
(xv) Tamil Nadu has implemented a number of
 centrally sponsored and donor funded 
watershed development schemes to improve the 
production potential of rainfed agriculture
. The government recently launched the Comprehens
ive Wasteland Programme, which will cover 2 
million hectares through a watershe
d development project. Waters
hed projects in India have 
enjoyed relatively little success in curbing land degr
adation, improving the pr
oductivity of rainfed 
agriculture, and reducing rural poverty, and remain
 to be carefully evaluated in Tamil Nadu. 
 Economic Incentives for Water Use: Taxes and Implicit Subsidies  (xvi) Under the current system of economic incentive
s (prices, subsidies, taxes) the cost of 
water for farmers and other water users does 
not reflect the scarcity value (opportunity 
cost) of water. Throughout India, farmers using surface 
water for irrigation from canals or tanks 
are implicitly subsidized because water char
ges fall short of opera
tions and maintenance 
expenditures. Between 1990 and 2002 farmers usin
g groundwater for irrigation in Tamil Nadu 
also benefited from free agricultural power supply.
 Subsidizing irrigation water means that the 
environmental costs of water use are not bein
g internalized, reducing incentives for water 
conservation, encouraging the cultivation of 
water-intensive crops, and contributing to 
environmental degradation. The irrigation and ag
ricultural power subsidies have contributed to 
the state™s large fiscal deficit. These subsidies also 
have a high opportunity cost in terms of other 
social and economic expenditures foregone, 
and few poor directly benefit from them.  
(xvii) In 2002, the Government of Tamil Nadu 
announced increases in irrigation water charges and reintroduced a tariff for agricultural power consumers
. These reformsŠ
charging for water on a per area basis (as is the case for surface irrigation) or on a flat rate basis 
(for agricultural power consumers)Šwere a step in 
the right direction. But even these reforms did 
not result in economically efficient pricing, becau
se the marginal cost for water was almost zero 
and thus demand for irrigation water was not affected. 
(xviii) Prior to 2003, water charges were levied 
by the Government of Tamil Nadu at a 
base rate (which varied according to crop, season, and soil quality) plus an additional 
charge equivalent to six times the base rate
. This additional charge was transferred to the local 
panchayats. Beginning in July 2003, an additi
onal water charge of Rs.150 per hectare was 
imposed, de-linked from any additional cess. Thus, farmers were to pay the original charge plus 
the Rs.150 per hectare. In addition, the FMIS Ac
t empowered water user associations to charge 
users between Rs.250 and Rs.500 per hectare. This fee could be retained by the associations for 
operation and maintenance of the systems turned over to them. 
(xix) The agricultural power tariff introduced in 2003 included a flat rate for unmetered 
connections of Rs.250 per horsepower a year
 and Rs.0.20 per kilowatt-hour for metered 
connections. Along with the reintroduction of the agricultural power tariff, the government 
announced an income support scheme for smallholde
rs and marginal farmers. Under the income 
support scheme, the Government of Tamil Nadu 
was to provide smallholders and marginal 
farmers a transfer of up to Rs.1,250 a year. This
 was a significant step toward creating a more 
direct and transparent system of subsidies to 
farmers and other target groups and ensuring the 
separation of commercial operation of the power u
tility from the need for subsidy. However, the 
reintroduction of agriculture power tariff became
 a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu during 
the recent national election, forcing the governme
nt which suffered severe electoral loss for the 
national parliament seats to reverse the policy. 
 viii (xx) Nonetheless, the analysis in this report su
ggests that introduction of a flat rate 
charge of Rs.250 a year for a five horsepower pu
mpset would have only a small effect on net 
returns to land and management, reducin
g them by only 4.9 to 6.5 percent
. Costs of crop cultivation using well irrigation would rise by only
 Rs.625 per hectare (annual charge pro-rated 
for one season) to Rs.1,250 per hectare (for sugar cane grown over eleven months). 
(xxi) Raising electricity charges to the estimated 
marginal economic price of electricity to 
agriculture of Rs.3.1 per kilowatt-hour, thou
gh, would increase irrigation costs to about 
Rs.4,600 per hectare for paddy and sugar cane
, reducing returns to land and management 
by 35.9 percent for paddy  and by 23.8 percent for sugar cane
. Likewise, total returns to land, 
labor, and capital (value added) would fall sharply 
for paddy and sugar cane irrigated by wells if 
farmers bore the cost of electricity for pumping, strengthening the case for a compensating 
income support scheme in this scenario.   
Other Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Food 
 (xxii) Although public expenditures on agriculture in Tamil Nadu are high, the quality of 
expenditures is a cause for concern
. Expenditures on agriculture, 
allied activities, and irrigation as a share of agricultural GSDP are higher in Tami
l Nadu than in most major agricultural states in 
India (World Bank 2003). Between 1998 and 2000 pub
lic expenditures on agriculture equaled 11 
percent of total agricultural GSDP in Tamil Nadu,
 compared with 7.8 percent in all of India.
4 Public agricultural capital expenditures in the state are relatively low compared with the all-India 
average, while the opposite is true of revenue (i.e. 
current) expenditures  as a share of agricultural 
GSDP. This is a situation for concern since capita
l investments are important for future growth. 
Furthermore, a large share of revenue expenditu
res are incurred on staff salaries, and  food and 
irrigation subsidies, leaving operating expenses under funded. Gross fixed capital formation in 
agriculture increased by 15 percent during the 1
990s, due primarily to private capital formation, 
which accounted for 88 percent of gross fixed capital formation in agriculture.  
(xxiii) The agricultural extension system in Tamil Nadu is still organized around a 
modified Training and Visit approach and 
continues to focus on major food-grains. There is little coordination among line departments (agricultu
ral, animal husbandry, fisheries) in their 
extension approach. The extension system is sl
owly changing, however, and the promotion of 
public-private partnerships in extension is en
couraging. The Government of Tamil Nadu also 
plans to link agricultural, horticultural, and agri
cultural engineering extension systems and units 
to improve the extension capacity fo
r horticultural development.   
(xxiv) Reforms of the public procurement system and improvements in targeting are 
reducing state expenditures on food subsidies
. The Government of Tamil Nadu estimates that 
the food subsidy will fall from Rs
.15 billion in 2001/02 to Rs.7 
billion in 2003/04. Cessation of 
local procurement (except on behalf of the 
Food Corporation of India) reduced government 
expenditures on procurement by an estimated Rs.6
.8 billion by eliminating the costs of paying 
extra procurement incentives and of milling the pa
ddy into rice. Additional savings came from 
reducing the subsidy per kilogram of rice sold 
and the number of cards (and ultimately the sales 
of rice). The total estimated reduction in subsidy (from both reforms on procurement and 
                                                     
 4Agricultural public expenditures as a share of expend
itures on Economic Servi
ces and Agricultural GSDP 
are averages of data from 1998/99Œ2000/01. 
 ixdistribution) was about Rs.9.92 billion, with about
 two-thirds due to the cessation of Government 
of Tamil Nadu procurement on its own behalf. 
Development of Agricultural Markets 
 (xxv) In the past decade Tamil Nadu has in
creased private sector participation in 
marketing and eliminated government restrictions
. Unlike most Indian states, where 
wholesale marketing is restricted to regulated markets, Tamil Nadu permits traders to transact 
sales outside of regulated markets. Private market
s account for about 90 percent of the statewide 
trade in major crops. Regulated markets, in whic
h licensed traders bid for farmer produce through 
a tender system, account for only 10 percent.  
(xxvi) In May 2003, following the February 
2002 central Government order removing 
licensing restrictions on rice and 13 other crops, the state Government withdrew its 
licensing system for these crops
. Restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking, and sales of 
these commodities have been removed, though
 some provision remains for Government intervention in the case of high market prices for 
goods distributed through the public distribution 
system.  
(xxvii) Greater private sector participation in mark
ets has enhanced food security in Tamil 
Nadu. Increases in state production of major stap
les (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice 
through the public distribution system, school feeding programs, and targeted relief 
programs have increased access to food
. During the drought of 2002/03 the wholesale prices of 
rice only rose 2.8 percent in real terms above th
e previous year™s prices despite a 34 percent fall 
in paddy production in the state. This was 
because private sector inflows from neighboring 
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka and the availability 
of rice through the public distribution system 
helped to maintain access to food for poor consumers. 
(xxviii) Private investments in processing and marketing horticultural and export crops have 
enjoyed some success (for example, tumeric exports from Erode). Contract farming involving 
business agreements for the purchase of outputs and 
often the provision of inputs and extension advice is increasing, particularly for sugarcane, cotton, and horticultural crops.   Policy Reform Options in Tamil Nadu™s Agriculture 
 (xxix) Reducing rural poverty, accelerating growth in agricultural production, and 
overcoming the constraints faced by the agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu require 
appropriate policies and investments in four priority areas
: improving the efficiency of water 
use, increasing the effectiveness of public expend
itures and agricultural extension, spurring the 
development of agricultural markets, and maximizi
ng the real income growth of the rural poor.  
 Improving the Efficiency of Water Use 
 (xxx) Long-term growth in agriculture and rural 
incomes depends in large part on using 
water efficiently
. Water management options include scaling up the pilot river basin framework 
for managing water resources holistically, allowi
ng interagency coordina
tion and public-private 
partnerships; introducing specific, legally enfor
ceable water entitlements to various users in a 
river basin and or aquifer framework; adjusting el
ectricity, water, and crop prices to change the 
 xfinancial incentives for irrigation and crop choice; and improving management practices and 
irrigation technologies (such as drip and sprinkler
 irrigation) and investing in canals and water 
storage (coupled with improved operation and maintenance). 
 (xxxi) Public administration in the water sect
or could be improved by separating 
responsibilities for water resource man
agement and irrigation service delivery
. Tamil Nadu 
is the only state in India without a separate departme
nt of irrigation, now a 
part of the Department of Public Works. Two new agencies are needed: a 
regulatory agency to allocate the share of water 
resources to agriculture, industry, and other uses,
 and an irrigation department focusing on irrigation delivery systems. A separate irrigati
on department would allow for the creation of a 
specialized cadre of irrigation specialists, instead
 of the current setup that relies on staff from the 
Department of Public Works (which also includes administration of public buildings).  

(xxxii) Irrigation management transfer is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and water user 
associations are not yet fully functional
. The transfer of irrigation management to farmers in 
line with the FMIS Act should be expedited to
 make water distribution more efficient and equitable.  
(xxxiii) Providing the right economic incentives (pric
es, subsidies, taxes) that recognize the 
opportunity cost of water is essential
 for improving water use efficiency. Raising electricity 
charges to the estimated marginal economic price 
of electricity to agriculture of Rs.3.1 per 
kilowatt-hour may not be politically feasible, but moving gradually toward marginal cost pricing 
(perhaps combined with compensation to farmers 
in the form of income transfers or a more 
reliable electricity supply) would help rationa
lize water use in Tamil Nadu. Paying greater 
attention to market infrastructure, strengthening
 research and extension to meet the needs of 
diversified agriculture, developing tools for fa
rmers to better manage 
risks, and improving 
irrigation pumpset efficiency are likely to make hi
gher power charges more palatable to farmers.  
If farmers™ costs and incomes varied according to 
the amount of electricity (and water) used with 
well irrigation, they would have an incentive to
 shift some land from water-intensive crops (rice 
and sugar cane) toward less water-intensive crops
 (including cotton, maize, and vegetables).  
(xxxiv) Increases in electricity charges would have
 little effect on overall rice production 
and market prices but a major effect on sugar cane production
. Since only about 10 percent 
of rice area cultivated is irrigated with well 
water (about 200 thousand hectares), changes in 
electricity pricing would have only marginal eff
ects on production. And since rice is also supplied 
by net public distribution (averaging 1.2 million t
ons a year from 1997/98 to 2001/02, 18 percent 
of net production) and private market trade from 
neighboring states (estimated at 1.0Œ1.3 million 
tons in the drought year 2002/03), the effect of
 lower rice production from well  irrigated areas on 
market prices of rice would likely be small.
 Impacts on sugar cane production would be much 
greater, however, as essentially all sugar cane is irrigated in part with well water.  
(xxxv) The current provisions for irrigation wat
er charges allow full cost recovery of required operations and maintenance expenditures
. The extent to which farmers are actually 
being charged the proposed water rates remains unclear.  

(xxxvi) Greater attention is also needed for 
modernizing irrigation infrastructure and 
scaling up the adoption of water saving irrigation technologies. While the use of sprinkler and 
drip technology has been promoted in the stat
e, the high capital cost of these technologies 
constrains widespread adoption by smallholde
rs and marginal farmers. More affordable 
technology or a suitable system of targeted subs
idies should be developed to increase the use of 
sprinkler and drip systems. 
 xi(xxxvii) Past experience reveals that extensive community participation with sound technical 
inputs are necessary for successful watershed programs. 
A basin perspective should be adopted 
to ensure that these initiatives do not have
 negative impacts on downstream human and 
ecological uses.   Increasing the effectiveness of public 
expenditures and agricultural extension  (xxxviii) Responding to the needs of diversified
 agriculture requires a highly effective 
research and agricultural extension system
. An assessment of the state™s comparative 
advantage in producing higher value crops for the 
domestic and export markets would also help 
in setting future research and development prioriti
es.  Re-orienting agricultural research to make 
it more farmer-responsive would likewise improve the output of a system that has enjoyed much 
success in rice technology development in the past. 
Similarly, the current extension system in the 
state remains organized around a modified Training and Visit approach and continues to be 
highly focused on major food-grains, though the pr
omotion of public-private partnerships in 
extension is a very encouraging recent  devel
opment and offers potential for both cost-savings 
and greater efficiency. Thus, it is recommende
d that the GoTN develop a new agricultural 
extension strategy to meet the changing needs 
of farmers. This could include adopting an 
integrated and decentralized extension system th
at could help build farmer organizations that 
could link with private firms to increase economic growth in rural areas.   
(xxxix) Rationalizing public expenditures and shi
fting expenditures from subsidies to 
investments in key public goods such rural 
roads, markets and agricultural research and 
extension will facilitate productivity improve
ments and diversification of agriculture to higher value products
. Tightening competition for limited fiscal resources heightens the urgency 
of appropriate public expenditure reallocati
on. Institutional reforms within government 
departments to ensure improved quality of deliver
y of rural-related public goods and services is 
also important.
 Promoting the development of well 
functioning agricultural markets  (xl) Well functioning agricultural markets are al
so important for successful agricultural 
diversification. If recent policy reforms removing restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking 
and sales of paddy and 13 other crops are consisten
tly implemented at the local level, they can be 
expected to improve marketing efficiency
, reducing the margin between producer and 
consumer/export prices. Reductions in marketing 
costs are also necessary in order for production 
increases to lead to higher agricu
ltural incomes, particularly for perishable high-value products 
(e.g. fruits, vegetables, animal products). Contr
act farming and other private sector initiatives 
should be encouraged, though the impact of
 these business arrangements on farmer incomes 
should be evaluated, as well . 
(xli) There remain, however, important roles for the public sector in promoting agro-
food system and agro-enterprise development
  In addition to policies that establish ﬁrules of 
the gameﬂ and address market failures, public i
nvestments in rural roads to strengthen rural 
connectivity can contribute to reduced costs 
of marketing.  Although Tamil Nadu has an 
extensive road network, further attention to ma
intenance and upgrading of rural roads in some 
regions may be warranted.  Given the rapidly cha
nging nature of markets in Tamil Nadu, an in-
depth study of market structure and investment needs would be useful.   
 xii(xlii) Increasing agricultural diversification will not compromise Tamil Nadu™s food 
security objectives given an effective PDS , we
ll-functioning markets and targeted nutrition 
programs
.  Greater food security has largely been 
achieved through increases in state production of major staples (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice through the PDS, school feeding 
programs, and targeted relief programs during droughts. During the recent drought of  2002/03 
the wholesale prices of rice only rose 2.8 percent (in real terms) above the previous year™s price, 

despite a 34 percent fall in paddy production in th
e state, helping to maintain access to food for 
poor consumers. This was largely due to privat
e sector inflows from neighboring states of Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka and the ava
ilability of rice through the PDS. 
 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor 
 (xliii) Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor
.  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops 
remains an important unresolved issue, however.  Contract farming may help overcome these 

problems, if competition between firms helps farmers 
maintain their share of the value of the final 
product sales.  The experience of Latin America 
and the Caribbean suggests that education, 
transport infrastructure, and engines of non-farm
 growth that promote female employment are 
key aspects of a success strategy to promote non-farm growth and rural poverty reduction. 
(xliv) Whether agricultural diversification reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new 
technologies and have access to markets, the 
magnitude of employment and real wage rate gains, and the size of linkage effects with 
rural non-agriculture. The implications of an agricultura
l diversification strategy involving 
higher risk crops and capital-intensive technologies (drip irrigation) must be assessed. This 
assessment should review crop and drought insu
rance instruments, and the potential for 
innovations in these instruments to enable rural fa
rmers, particularly poor farmers, to better 
manage risks.   10100200300400500600
700
800
9001980-811982-83
1984-851986-871988-89
1990-91
1992-93
1994-951996-97
1998-99
2000-01Rs. Billion
 (Constant 1993-94 Rupees)Agriculture and allied 
Industry 
Services 
TAMIL NADU 
AGRICULTURAL DEVEL0PMENT
 1. Introduction  1.1 The agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu has a 
long history of notable achievements 
and significant progress.  Construction of the Grand Anicut (dam) on the Cauvery river in the 
second century AD permitted a large expansion of
 irrigated area and rice cultivation, and a 
flourishing of the Chola kingdom.  Centuries 
later, rapid expansion of green revolution 
technology (improved seeds, increased fertilizer use,
 and irrigation) enabled the state to increase 
average rice yields by 74.4 percent between 
the trienniums ending 1972/73 and 2001/02, enabling 
production to increase by 36.2 percent in spite of 
a 21.9 percent decrease in
 area cultivated with rice.   1.2 While agricultural sector growth rates in Tamil Nadu were among the highest in 
India during the 1980s and early 1990s, decelerati
on in growth since the mid-1990s is of 
increasing concern to policymakers
. During the 1980s agricultural GSDP grew at 3.4 percent, 
exceeding the all-India agricultural growth of 2.9 
percent. Adequate rainfall contributed to even 
higher growth in the early 1990s: between 1989/90 
and 1994/95 agriculture grew by 7.2 percent 
in Tamil Nadu, compared with 3.1 percent in 
all of India. But between 1994/95 and 1999/2000 
agriculture in Tamil Nadu suffered from severe cons
ecutive droughts and grew only 1.3 percent a 
year, compared with 2.9 percent for all of India. 
As a result, the state™s agricultural growth rate 
during the 1990s was only 2.9 percent a year, compared with 3.2 percent for all of India. 

1.3 In contrast to the uneven growth in agriculture, the non-agricultural economy of 
Tamil Nadu has expanded rapidly, leading to a sh
arp decline in the share of agriculture in total output (
Figure  1.1).  The agricultural and allied services 
(livestock, forestry and fisheries) 
sector™s contribution to GSDP has declined fro
m 24.3 percent in 1980/81 to 15.7 percent in 
2001/02, one of the lowest shares in the country. By comparison, between 1980/81 and 2001/02 
the services sectors share of GSDP increased from 
40.7 percent to 51.5 percent, while the share of 
industry decreased slightly, from 35 percent to 32.8 percent. 
Figure  1.1:  Sectoral Contributions to GDP, 1980-2000 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 Source:  World Bank States Database
 21.4 Despite its declining importance in th
e overall economy, however, agriculture remains a major source of employmen
t and earnings for the rural poor.  About  56 percent 
of the state™s population of 62 million (2001 Census) 
resides in rural areas and close to half (14.4 
million workers) of an estimated 29 million workers are employed in agriculture (
Table  1.1).  For 
the poorest rural quintile (approximately 1.5 milli
on households with about 7.5 million people), 
more than three-quarters of income continues to
 be derived from agriculture, with agriculture 
wage labor alone accounting for half of house
hold income. Agricultural labor accounts for 49.5 
percent of the labor force in the state, less than the all-India average of 59.2 percent.  Unlike most 
of India (with the exception of Andhra Pradesh), 
agricultural laborers outnumber cultivators by a 
1.69:1 ratio (compared with a 0.88:1 ration across 
India), further highlighting the importance of 
returns to labor for poverty reduction.    
 Table  1.1:  Population, Labor Force and Ag
riculture in Tamil Nadu and Other States 
  Andhra Pr.MaharashtraPunjab 
KarnatakaTamil Nadu  All India 
Population (2000 census)        
  Total (mns) 75.796.824.352.762.1  1027.0
  Rural (mns) 55.255.716.034.834.9  741.7

  Urban (mns) 20.541.08.217.927.2  285.4
  % rural 72.9%57.6%66
.1%66.0%56.1%  72.2%
        
Labor force in agriculture        
  as percentage of total 62.3%55.4%39.4%55.9%49.5%  59.2%

  Cultivators (% of total) 22.7%28.6%23.0%29.5%18.4%  31.6%

  Agric laborers (%of total) 
39.6%26.8%16.4%26.4%31.2%  27.6%
  Agric laborers/cultivators 1.750.940.710.901.69  0.88

        

GSDP/capita (2001)          11,154         17,394      17
,436       13,335        14,393             11,752 
        

Share of agric&allied 28.0%12.6%38.7%28.5%17.3%  24.2%

Agric&allied/capita            3,121           2,199        6,740          3,805          2,486              2,847 

Agricultural GSDP/worker            6,779           5,059      
17,909         8,530          5,552              7,603 
        

Agricultural wage (1999-00)       

  (Kharif, Rs/man-day) 45.3
243.7477.6642.7662.19  51.81
 Source: Population Census 2001 ; CMIE 2003 ; Reports of the 
Commission for Agric Costs and Prices 2001-02 (published 2002), 
pp.304f. 
 1.5 Agricultural growth has played a major role
 in rural poverty reduction in the past 
in Tamil Nadu, and could make subs
tantial contributions in the future.  Analysis based on 
household surveys indicates that the spread of green revolution technology in the 1970s and 
1980s contributed to sizeable increases in returns to
 land, raising farmer™s incomes.  Increasing 
demand for goods and services by farm households fu
rther stimulated expansion of the rural non-
farm economy contributing to poverty reduction. 
Although rural poverty rates declined by 6.7-
14.2 percent (depending on the definition of 
the poverty line), between 1993/94 and 1999/00, 
there remain between 7 and 11 million rural poor 
in Tamil Nadu (1999/00 data), 21-32 percent of 
the rural population.  Increases in agricultural 
production, processing and trade could enable further declines in rural poverty.    
 3  Fostering Agricultural Growth in Tamil Nadu 
 1.6 Yields of major crops in Tamil Nadu are among the highest in India, but 
productivity growth has slowed in recent years
. By the late 1990s, yields of major crops grown 
in Tamil Nadu including paddy, sugar cane, cotton and groundnut were among the highest across 
major Indian states.  In 1998-99, Tamil Nadu 
had the highest rice, sugar cane and groundnut 
yields in India and cotton yields in the state were second only to Gujarat.  Increases in yields 
enabled land productivity to grow by 6.1 per
cent per year between 1987/88 and 1993/94 from Rs 
16,423/ha to Rs 23,459/ha (in constant 93/94 Rs),
 but by only 2.4 percent per year between 
1993/94 and 1999/00 (to Rs 27,099/ha in constant
 93/94 Rs).  Likewise, average labor 
productivity in agriculture increased by an aver
age of 4.6 percent per year between 1987/88 and 
1993/94 from Rs 6,881 per worker to Rs 9,024 per 
worker (in constant 93/94 Rs), but by only 2.4 
percent per year between 1993/94 and 1999/00  to 
Rs 10,434 per worker (in constant 93/94 Rs).  
1.7 Traditional sources of agricultural growth
 face major constraints including growing 
water scarcity, increasing land degradation and 
declining farm sizes, and rising costs of 
agricultural labor. Tamil Nadu is one of the driest states 
in India, with an average of only 925 
millimeters of rainfall per year. The state has a 
dry season that extends over five months of the 
year (January through May) even in good years, and severe droughts occur in three out of every 
ten years severely limiting cultivation of crops betw
een the months of June and September.  The 
per capita availability of water resources of Tam
il Nadu is only 900 cubic meters compared to an 
all-India average of 2200 cubic meters per a
nnum. Irrigation through a combination of canals, 
tanks,5 and wells, increases the reliability and availability of water for farming, and is essential 
for successful cultivation of crops in much of the 
state.  Nonetheless, seasonality of supply and 
scarcity of water limit cultivation to only 
one crop per plot for most of the state.
6  In addition to growing water scarcity, the agricultural sector
 faces increasing competition for water from 
industries and domestic users and intensifying inte
rstate competition for surface water resources. 
In many parts of the state, the rate of extr
action of groundwater has exceeded recharge rates contributing to falling water tables. Water quality issues are also of increasing concern. Effluents 
discharged from industries as well
 as heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers have had a major 
impact on surface water quality, soils and groundwater.     
1.8 Agricultural land resources have also come
 under increasing pressure because of 
rapid population growth and increasing urbanization
. The available cultivable land per rural 
resident has declined from 0.22 ha/capita to 
0.15 ha/capita between 1971/72 and 1997/98. The 
growing pressures on land coupled with skew
ed pricing policies and rural poverty have 
contributed to land and soil degradation. As a r
esult, poor soil fertility, salinity, water logging, 
over grazing, and deforestation are growing pr
oblems and pose serious constraints to the 
performance of the agricultural sector
 in some parts of the state.  1.9 Solid growth in agricultural output and employment, rapid growth in the non-
agricultural sector, and rural-urban migration have all contributed to rising real 
agricultural wages over the past two decades.  
These higher returns to labor have contributed 
                                                     
 5 A tank is a manmade small-scale surface water reserv
oir on a gentle slope, designed so that water may 
flow out of the tank through the force of gravity.  
6 Average cropping intensity in Tamil Nadu is only
 1.20, compared to 1.34 (1998-99) for all-India. 
 4to the state™s success in raising rural incomes 
and reducing rural povert
y, though unemployment 
in the dry season remains a major factor underl
ying low incomes of poor rural households.  
 1.10 However, high real agricultural wages a
nd seasonal labor shortages have also 
increased the costs of cultivation, and tended 
to reduce the competitiveness of Tamil Nadu 
agriculture vis-à-vis other states and in international markets.  
Rural daily wage rates for 
male agricultural labor in the kharif season in 
Tamil Nadu in 1999-2000 averaged 62.2 Rs/day, 
compared with only 45.3 and 42.8 Rs/day in
 Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, respectively (
Table  1.1).  These higher labor costs have spurred m
echanization of some operations, including field 
preparation and rice harvesting, but small farm
 sizes constrain the rate of mechanization. 
 1.11 Faced with these constraints, the Governme
nt has adopted a strategy of agricultural 
diversification to accelerate agricultural growth
. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions are 
well suited to diversified agriculture. Furthermor
e, rapidly increasing incomes and changing food 
demand patterns provide strong impetus for 
diversification. The Government™s 10
th plan articulates a strategy to reinvigorate agricultura
l growth through improved productivity, higher 
cropping intensities, diversification and increasi
ng commercialization. Efficient land and water management underlie the proposed strategy for grow
th in agriculture. The Government™s recently 
announced approach to diversifying agriculture 
includes area expansion through the development 
of waste and fallow lands and crop substitution by further developing the horticultural sector. 
Emphasis is also placed on improving the productivit
y of water through the promotion of drip and 
sprinkler irrigation technology and improved irrigation practices.   
1.12 In spite of some promising recent steps, 
current price incentives do not promote 
efficient water and land resource use, and the 
research and extension system remains better 
suited for technology for traditional crops
. Existing input subsidies for power, water and 
fertilizer distort incentives for diversification and su
stainable use of natural resources. Further, the agricultural research and extension is not yet in
 a position to respond to the new demands of   
diversified agriculture. With its relatively edu
cated rural labor force and growing manufacturing 
sector, Tamil Nadu is well poised to capture the be
nefits of rural non-farm growth stimulated by 
both upstream and down stream linkages 
with diversified agriculture.   Plan of the Report 
 1.13 Against this background the objectives of
 this study are to assess agricultural 
policies in Tamil Nadu and the implications of
 these policies for future agricultural growth, 
food security and rural poverty reduction, and to recommend reform options
.  This report focuses on selected critical issues related to agricultural growth in
 Tamil Nadu, rather than a 
comprehensive review of the agricultural sector in 
the state. The analysis focuses on the structure 
of the agricultural economy, water management, 
agricultural subsidies, agricultural marketing 
and regulations, and implications
 of policy reforms for food security and consumption of the 
poor.   1.14 Chapter 2 provides an overview of the structure of the agriculture sector and the rural 
economy, focusing on the major crops and cropping 
patterns, livestock and fisheries. Chapter 3 
examines the importance of water for agricultu
re.  Chapter 4 discusses public policies and 
agricultural research and extension issues.  
Chapter 5 focuses on agricultural markets and 
marketing policies. Chapter 6 discusses issues re
lated to food security and rural poverty. The 
conclusion and policy options are presented in Chapter 7.   

1.15 This paper is based on the missions™ discussions
 with various stakeholders, including the 
Government of Tamil Nadu, farmers, agricultural laborers, private sector representatives and 
academics.  This work also draws on a backgroun
d paper, ﬁPromoting Agricultural Development 
 5in Tamil Nadu:  Perspectives, Dimensions and Potentials,ﬂ prepared by a team of researchers at 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University led by Pr
ofessor C. Ramasamy.  The study complements 
other concurrent analytic work (particular, the 
papers on  poverty and investment climate) on 
Tamil Nadu. 
 62. Overview  2.1 Tamil Nadu™s agriculture, though dominated fo
r centuries by rice cultivation in river 
basins, varies considerably across the state™
s major agro-climatic zones.  Although water 
availability limits cultivation on most land to a 
single crop, technological change in agriculture 
has enabled increased yields and production over a 
wide range of crops.  Livestock sector growth, particularly poultry and dairy products, has also accelerated in the 1990s. 
Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
 2.2 Tamil Nadu is divided into seven agro-climatic zones
 based on rainfall distribution, irrigation patterns, soil types, and other ecological characteristics (
Figure  2.1, 
Table  2.1).
7  The 
Cauvery Delta which forms its own agro-ecological
 zone, enjoys relatively high rainfall relative 
to most of Tamil Nadu (1101 millimeters per yea
r), and irrigation water through canals for six to 
seven months in good rainfall years in the catchme
nt area of the Cauvery river.  The Northeast, 
which includes Chennai, includes the Palar river basin and surrounding hillsides.  Sufficient 
concentrated rainfall and slow drainage enable
 irrigation from natural and man-made tanks.  
Average annual rainfall is slightly less in the 
North zone (849 millimeters); the western zone 
which receives very little rainfall from the southwest
 monsoon is the driest region, with only 714 
millimeters of average annual rainfall.
  Total rainfall in the Southern 
zone is similar to that of the 
north zone, but there are few large river basins, 
apart from the Tambraparni which flows south in 
Tirunelveli district.  The two remaining zones receive
 more rainfall than the rest of the state.  The 
High Rainfall zone, located in the southern tip of Tamil Nadu (Kanniyakum
ari district), receives 
heavy rainfall from the southwest monsoon, (annual 
average rainfall of 1457 millimeters).  In the 
Hilly zone that includes the mountains in Wester
n Tamil Nadu, (Nilgiris district and the western edge of several other districts), numerous types of tree crops are cultivated.      
Figure  2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
                                                       
 7 Rainfall data in Table 2.2 and other data on area, yield and production of crops by agro-climatic zones are 
based on data for the districts indicated.  Thes
e figures are only approximate indicators of the 
characteristics of the zones, howe
ver, since actual boundaries of ag
ro-climatic zones do not coincide 
exactly with district  boundaries.   
 7 2.3 Rice is the major crop in the Cauvery delta zone and the Northeast zone, 
(52.4 and 42.3 percent of gross area cultivated, respectivel
y), but plays a smaller role in the farming 
systems of the drier Western and Northwestern zones
 (9.6 and 15.9 percent of gross area 
cultivated, respectively) (
Table  2.2).  In these latter areas, other cereals, (millets, sorghum and 
maize) account for 18.8 and 24.6 percent of gross 
area cultivated, respectively.  Cropping patterns 
are more diversified in the Western, South, and High Rainfall zones, where the share of crops 
other than cereals, pulses, sugar cane, cotton a
nd groundnuts, is 38.1, 27.9 and 46.2 percent, respectively.  Tree crops dominate the cropping patterns in the Hilly zone.    
 Table  2.1:  Agro-climatic Zones of Tamil Nadu 
Zone Districts Geogra
phical area Rainfall
    Million Ha Percent mm 
Northeastern (Yellow) Kancheepur
am, Thiruvallur, Vellore,     
  Thiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Cuddalore 31.2 24 1109 
Northwestern (Orange) Dharmapuri, Salem, Namakkal, Perambalur 18.3 14.1 849 
Western (Brown) Erode, Coimbatore, Karur, Dindigul 15.6 12 714 
Cauvery Delta (Green) Thiruchirapalli, Thanjavur, Thiruvarur,  19.2 14.8 1101 
  Nagapattinam    
Southern (Red) Theni, Madurai, Pudukottai,  41.5 31.9 814 
  Ramanathapuram, Sivagangai, Virudhunagar,    
  Thirunelveli, Thoothukudi    
High rainfall (Dark Green) Kanniyakumari 1.7 1.3 1457 
Hill  (Blue) The Nilgiris, Western ghats 2.5 2 1857 
Total Tamil Nadu   130 100 925 
Note: Data in Table 2.1 correspond to the boundaries of zones define
d by the Department of Agriculture as shown in Figure 1.1. 
 Other tables showing data by agro-climatic 
zone use slightly different definitions from Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (200
3); 
(see Appendix Table 1).   
 
Table  2.2:  Gross Area Cultivated and Cropping
 Patterns by Agro-ecological Zone   (2001-02)  
  GCA ('000 
has) 
Paddy 
Other 
Cereals Pulses Sugar Cane 
Ground-
nuts Cotton Other 
Crops All Crops
          
1. Northeast 1,600 42.3% 7.5%13.6%8.8%18.6%1.1% 8.2% 100.0%
2. Northwest 766 15.9% 24.6%20.9%5.7%20.9%3.8% 8.1% 100.0%

3. Western 638 9.6% 18.8%13.3%7.7%9.5%3.1% 38.1% 100.0%
4. Cauvery Delta 1,281 52.4% 8.5%19.0%3.4%5.1%2.7% 8.8% 100.0%
5. Southern 1,404 35.5% 9.9%14.2%3.1%4.9%4.5% 27.9% 100.0%

6. High Rainfall 98 28.7% 0.0%25.0%0.0%0.1%0.0% 46.2% 100.0%
7. Hilly 77 2.8% 0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0% 97.1% 100.0%

          
All Tamil Nadu 6,226 33.1% 11.3%18.0%5.2%10.6%2.6% 19.1% 100.0%
 2.4 Multiple cropping in Tamil Nadu is severely limited by the relatively low levels of 
rainfall, concentrated in only a few months of the year
.  Only one crop per year can be grown 
in the upland areas in most parts of the state. 
 Even in river valleys, 
water availability through 
 8surface irrigation in canals is sufficient for two cr
ops in only a few areas, and depends heavily on 
the extent and timing of the southwest monsoons. 
 Likewise, water availability through irrigation 
from tanks or wells is limited in the dry season. 
 Thus, although 55 percent of net area cultivated 
in Tamil Nadu is irrigated, the cropping intensity 
is only 1.2.  In the drier south region (zone 6), 
the cropping intensity is only 1.06 (Ramasamy et. al., 2003) . 
Major Crops  2.5 Rice dominates both agricultural production
 and food consumption, accounting for 
about one-third of total gross cropped area and 
nearly 60 percent of irrigated area in Tamil Nadu (Figure  2.2, Table  2.3). About 5 percent of total cropped area is devoted to sugar cane, all 
of it irrigated (accounting for almost 10 percent of irrigated land). Pulses (18 percent of total 
cropped area), millets (11 percent) and groundnuts 
(10 percent) require less water that rice or 
sugar cane, and, millets and pulses are grown al
most exclusively on non-irrigated land.  Cotton 
occupies only about 3 percent of cropped area; a
bout one third of the cotton crop is irrigated 
(Figure  2.3).  Water shortages, ample supplies of 
Food Corporation of India rice stocks, and 
potential for cultivation of higher value crops un
derlie the Tamil Nadu government™s policy of 
promoting crop diversification.   
Figure  2.2:  Distribution of Gross Cropped Area by Crop 
01,000
2,000
3,000

4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
1980-811990-912001-02
Gross Cropped Area ('000 Hectares)Other crops
Sugarcane
Cotton
Other cereals
Pulses
Millets
Cholam (Sorghum)
GroundnutPaddy 
 Source:  Ramasamy et. al, 2003
 Figure  2.3:  Irrigated Area by Crop (1999-2000) 
     
 
 
   
  
 05001000150020002500
Other Crops
Cotton
Sugar Cane
Pulses
Millets
Groundnut
Paddy
Area ('000 Hectares)
Cropped Area
Irrigated Area
 9  2.6 In most of Tamil Nadu, a single rice cro
p is grown, planted some time between 
August and October in anticipation of the onset of the northeast monsoons and harvested 
four to five months later.8  In the Cauvery delta region, which accounted for 33 percent of rice 
area cultivated in 2001/02, two rice crops are grow
n on land where sufficient water is available. On about 120 thousand hectares of cultivated land, the 
kuruvai (June/July Œ October/November) 
rice crop is followed by 
thaladi (October/November Œ February/March) in the four major 
districts9.  On another 200-240 thousand hectares of land, there is generally insufficient water for 
two crops (because of drought or lack of canal water), and a single 
samba  crop (August-January) 
is grown. Total gross cultivated area of rice in 
these districts is thus 440-480 thousand hectares.
 10   2.7 Rice production increased rapidly in Tamil Nadu from the 1950s to the 1970s, as 
green revolution technology (high-yielding varieties, fertilizer, and irrigation) spread
.  Area 
planted to paddy in Tamil Nadu expanded by 
52.6 percent from 1.73 million hectares in 1950/51 
to an average of 2.64 million hectares in 1970s, in
 part due to increased well irrigation.  Yields 
also increased, from an average of 1.31 tons of 
paddy (in rice equivalent) in the 1950s to 1.94 
tons in the 1970s.  As a result, average producti
on in the 1970s was 87 percent higher than that of 
the 1950s (Rajagopalan, 2000).    
2.8 Area planted to paddy peaked in 1979/80 (2.906 million hectares), but has declined 
steadily since that time, from 2.82 million h
ectares for the triennium ending (TE)  in 
1979/80 to 2.13 million hectares fo
r the triennium ending in 2001/02 (a 24.4 percent decline 
in total).  Yield increased by 67.6 percent over the 
same period (from 2.02 to 3.39 tons/ha), more 
than outweighing the decline in area.  The most ra
pid period of yield growth occurred in the late 
1980s: from the triennium ending in 1985/86 to 1990/01, yields increased by 44.1 percent from 
2.14 to 3.08 tons/hectare.  Overall for the en
tire period (1979/80 to 2001/02), production of rice 
increased 26.7 percent, reaching a peak of 8.14 million tons in 1998/99.     
2.9 Sugar cane, with a duration of 11 months, is grown on land irrigated by canals and 
wells.11  About 10 percent of irrigated area is plante
d with sugar cane and the crop requires, on 
average 1800 millimeters of water per unit area cu
ltivated.  Given that a single crop remains in 
the field year-round, however, its 
total water use per crop per year
 is less than two crops of paddy, but still greater than any other crop.  
Over all, sugar cane, which accounted for 5.16 
percent of gross cropped area in 2000-2001 used an estimated 14.0 percent of irrigation water 
resources.  Sugar cane yields in Tamil Nadu (109 to
ns/ha) are the highest in India (all-India yield 
is 68 tonnes/ha).  Four-fifths of sugar cane is sold 
directly to sugar mills; the remainder is used to 
make jaggery (i.e. gur or unrefined sugar).  
Government support prices have maintained output 
price incentives for sugar production over time.  While
 real market prices for paddy have declined 
                                                     
 8 The timing of the cropping seasons shown here and elsewhere in this report are approximate, and vary 
somewhat across regions and according to
 the timing of the monsoon rains. 
9 Figures on crop area by season are for the four districts of the Cauvery delta as defined by the Department 
of Agriculture: Thiruchirapalli, Thanjavur, Thiruvarur,
 and Nagapattinam.  Two other districts, Karur and 
Perambular, districts are included in the Cauvery Delta 
agro-climatic zone in the tables in this report.  
10 See Hazell and Ramasamy (eds.), (1991) for a detailed description of cropping patterns in North Arcot 
(Vellore and Thiruvannamalai districts).    
11 A second 
ratoon
 crop, grown from the roots and base of the stalks from the first harvest, is cultivated on 
approximately 70-80 percent of the area planted to sugar cane.   
             Source: Ramasamy et. al, 2003
  10by an average of 4.8 percent per year from 1990 to 
2000, real prices of sugar cane have increased 
slightly over the same period (0.5 percent per year) (
Table  2.4).    
 Table  2.3:  Area and Share of Gross Cropped Area (GCA) by Crop 
  1980-81
  1990-91
  2001-02 
    000 ha % GCA000 ha % GCA000 ha % GCA 
Paddy  2,29935.541,85628.072,060 33.08 
Cholam (Sorghum) 5919.145418.18317 5.09 
Cumbu (Pearl Millet) 3285.072744.15125 2.01 
Ragi (Finger Millet) 1973.041702.57125 2.01 
Maize 190.29270.4213 0.21 
Other cereals 2664.111692.5666 1.05 
Total cereals  3,70357.233,03845.952,766 44.43 
Total pulses  5448.4184712.811,122 18.03 
Total food grain 4,24765.643,88558.763,888 62.45 
Sugarcane 1832.832333.52321 5.16 
Vegetables --1472.22216 3.46 
Cotton 2213.412393.62164 2.64 
Groundnut 84213.0196314.56663 10.65 
Coconut 1121.731802.72336 5.39 
Fodder crop 1061.632103.17200 3.22 
Green manure 230.3640.058 0.13 
Gross cropped area  6,4701006,6121006,226 100 
Area cropped more than once 1,109-1,033-1,054 - 

Net cropped area  5,360-5,578-5,172 - 
Cropping intensity 1.2-1.19-1.2 - 
Source:  Ramasamy et. al, 2003 
 Table  2.4:   Growth rates of real 
Market Prices of Major Commodities 
Year Paddy CholamGroundnutCottonSugar Cane 
1980-1990 -3.00%-2.90%-1.50%-1.60%-2.20%
1990-2000 -4.80%1.00%-2.60%0.70%0.50%
1980-2000 -2.70%-1.40%-1.60%0.30%0.00%
Source: Paddy data from Raveendaran (
1994) and Department of Agriculture.  
All other crops from TNAU Agriculture Report  
 2.10 Cotton cultivation declined during the 1990s by 2.38 percent per year due to 
increased incidence of pests and diseases, the hi
gh cost of pesticides, and unstable output 
prices.  Cotton is cultivated throughout the state except 
in the high rainfall zones, with the largest 
concentration in the drier southern zone (
Table  2.5).   Although cotton requires less water than 
rice (about 600 millimeters per season), it is a 
longer duration crop (six months) than rice 
(generally 4 months).  Thus, cotton cultivation in
 most of Tamil Nadu requires some irrigation.  
 11Nonetheless, it does not grow well in water-l
ogged soils, making cotton cultivation difficult in 
canal systems with heavy soils and lack of wate
r control.  As a result, cotton cultivation is 
concentrated in the western zone, where irrigati
on in drier months is s
upplied by well water.  
Biological control methods that include intercroppi
ng of cotton with other plants have enabled a 
reduction in pesticide use in recent years.  Co
mmercial cultivation of genetically modified Bt 
cotton commenced in Tamil Nadu during 2002. (
Text Box  2.1).  Only about 50,000 tons of the 
600,000 tons of cotton lint used annually by 
the state™s textile factories (mainly around 
Coimbatore) are produced in the state; the bulk of
 the cotton lint derives from Maharashtra, other 
Indian states, and imports. 
 Table  2.5:  Tamil Nadu: Share of Area Cultiv
ated by Agro-ecologica
l Zone for Major Crops 
(2001-02) 
  GCA Paddy 
Other 
CerealsPulses Sugar Cane 
Groundnuts Cotton 
Other 
Crops 
         
1. Northeast 27.3% 32.8%17.7%23.4%43.8%45.7% 10.4% 9.4%
2. Northwest 13.1% 5.9%27.9%17.2%13.7%24.5% 17.9% 7.2%

3. Western 10.9% 3.0%17.7%9.1%15.4%9.2% 12.2% 21.2%
4. Cauvery Delta 21.8% 32.6%16.1%26.2%13.7%10.1% 20.9% 12.1%
5. Southern 23.9% 24.2%20.6%21.4%13.5%10.5% 38.6% 38.4%

6. High Rainfall 1.7% 1.4%0.0%2.6%0.0%0.0% 0.0% 3.0%
7. Hilly 1.3% 0.1%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0% 0.0% 8.7%

         
All Tamil Nadu 100.0% 100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
   Source:  Ramasamy et al. , 2003 
 Table  2.6:   Distribution of Gross Irrigated Area by Major Crops (1999-2000) 
  Cropped 
Area Cropped 
Area Irrigated Area Irrigated Area Irrigated/ Total Area
Water Requirement 
Share of 
Irrigated Water Use  '000 has percent '000 
has percent percent mms percent 
        
Paddy 216433.20%201658.70%93.20%1350 67.10%
Millets 77611.90%932.70%12.00%500 1.10%
Pulses 69310.60%---   ---   ---   400 
 Cotton 1782.70%621.80%34.80%650 1.00%
Sugar Cane 3164.80%3169.20%100.00%1800 14.00%
Groundnut 75911.60%2657.70%34.90%500 3.30%
Other Crops 163325.00%68419.90%29.40%800 13.50%
Total 6519100.00%3436100.00%52.70%
 100.00%
Current Fallow 1085
      
Other Fallows 1139            
Note: Irrigated area under other crops includes pulses. Water re
quirements for other crops estimated at 800 mms, given water 
requirements of chilies and turmeric (850) 
and tomatos (550). Share of water use estimated using water requirement times irriga
ted area.  This estimate assumes that each irrigated crop receives
 the same share of its water requirements from irrigation. 
Source: GoTN, 2002b.
   122.11 Production of cholam (sorghum/jowar),
 cumbu (pearl millet/bajra), and ragi 
(mundua/finger millet) increased slightly in 
the 1980s, but declined in the 1990s,
 registering overall growth rates of -2.33, -2.05 and -1.02 pe
r cent respectively over the entire period.  These 
crops (included along with maize in the broad category of ﬁmilletsﬂ in Tamil Nadu), are grown 
almost exclusively on non-irrigated land, as cumbu 
and ragi are particularly drought tolerant.  
Often planted on non-irrigated land in December/
January after the northeast monsoon has ended, 
the crop survives on residual moisture and is harv
ested in the dry season (around April).  Shifts in 
food habits due to increased income and urba
nization have reduced demand for these crops, and 
real prices of cholam declined by 1.4 percent pe
r year over the 1980s and 1990s, despite the slow 
growth in production (
Table  2.4).      
Text Box  2.1:  Bt Cotton in Tamil Nadu 
  2.12 Maize production has increased very rapidly (by 8.25 percent per year) over the last 
two decades from just 20 thousand tons in 1980-81 to 118 thousand tons in 2001-02
, due to an increase in demand from the poultry and ot
her livestock feed industries. Production is 
concentrated in western and southern zones, the 
two zones with the lowest annual rainfall.  There 
has been little change in average yields, whic
h have hovered at about 1.6 tons/hectare. 
2.13     Groundnut production increased by 5.07 percent per year in the 1980s, but 
stagnated during the 1990s (declining by 0.50 percent year), due to a decline in area 
cultivated (Table  2.7).  Slack demand for groundnuts, reflected 
in an average decline in real 
market prices of 2.6 percent year in the 
1990s, has reduced producer incentives, as well (Table 
 2.4).  Nonetheless, yields have increased by an
 average of 3.32 percent over the 1980s and 1990s.  
Groundnuts require far less water than rice and do not
 perform well in water-logged soils, so they 
Genetically modified Bt cotton has been grown commercially in Tamil Nadu since 2002 and is 
currently the only biotech crop that has been approved for commercial cultivation in the state. Bt cotton 
contains the gene for Cry1AC which provides a high degree of resistance to the bollworm, a common 
pest whose larvae feed on cotton bolls. The technology introduced into India through a collaboration 
between Monsanto and the Maharashtra Hybrid 
Seed Company (Mahyco) 
received commercial 
approval in 2002 with farmers in Tamil Nadu harvesting their first crop of Bt cotton in 
January/February, 2003.   
 According to data from Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) Ltd. (MMB) 295 farmers have planted Bt 
Cotton over an area of 374 hectares in Tamil Nadu.  Of the 925 packets of seed sold during the 2002 
Kharif crop, 745 were of the MECH 162 variety, with the remaining 180 being of the MECH 184 
variety
.    Early experience from the state indi
cates that pesticide use against bollworms dropped by 65-70 percent 
on most farms and farmers realized an average yield in
crease of 30 percent  (MMB).  As a result of the 
drought in Tamil Nadu last year the pest pressure wa
s low resulting in the Bt cotton crop faring fairly 
well in the state in comparison to other southern states which grew Bt cotton. Normally farmers spray 
8-10 times for controlling bollworms in their cotton crop.  As many as 15 sprays may be needed in 
some districts of Tamil Nadu.  Farmers cultivating Bollgard in 2002-03 managed their crop with a 

maximum of 4 sprays.  In most cases farmers only used 2-3 sprays in the Bollgard Cotton crop, 
compared to 6-8 sprays used in other commercial cotton crops. 
 
As pest related damage on cotton plots in India is fairly high (averaging 50-60 percent), the yield 
effects of Bt cotton in field trials in India have b
een larger than those observed in countries such as 
China and the United States where pest pressure is lower and farmers exhibit a higher rate of pesticide 
adoption.  It is still too early to assess the real 
success of Bt cotton in Tami
l Nadu.  Increasing bollworm 
resistance to Bt resulting from 
poor farm management practices 
is growing cause for concern. 
 13are typically grown from December through April,
 after the heavy monsoon rains.  Nonetheless, 
for 35 percent of area cultivated, supplemental irrigation is used in the dry season. Groundnut 
cultivation is concentrated in the Northeast 
and North zones which account for 70 percent of 
groundnut area cultivated, (45.7 and 24.5
 percent, respectively).     
2.14 The share of gross cultivated area devot
ed to horticultural and other crops has 
increased from 15.1 percent in 1980-81 to 19.5 p
ercent in 1990-91, but has remained at only 
19.1 percent in 2001-02
.  In 2002-03 approximately 815,000 hectares (12.5 percent of total 
cropped area) was under horticultural crops. Plantation crops accounted for 29 percent of the 

horticultural crop area with fruits, vegetables and spices accounting for a further 28 percent, 22 
percent and 19 percent, respectively. The re
cently announced Comprehensive Wasteland 
Programme aims at promoting perennial horticulture crops on 2 million hectares of cultivable 
wastelands in the state. The 
state has also been promoting the cultivation of medicinal and 
aromatic plants with these crops accounting for 
approximately 5000 hectares (less than 1 percent 
of total cropped area). There is a growing interest in bio-fuel crops (Jatropha and Paradise Tree) 
although these crops are yet to be grown commercially in the state.  
Table  2.7:  Growth Rates in Area, Yields and Production: 1980s and 1990s 
  % GCA  Area     Yield     Production 
  2001-02 1980's 1990'sOverall 1980's1990'sOverall 1980s 1990s Overall
Rice 33.08
-2.53 1.03-0.247.540.872.874.821.902.62
Cholam 
5.09
-0.99 -4.92-3.995.85-0.731.744.8-5.61-2.33
Cumbu 
2.01
-2.52 -6.13-4.414.23.092.481.57-3.23-2.05
Ragi 
2.01
-2.18 -4.58-3.233.990.202.291.72-4.39-1.02
Maize  0.21
5.88 10.358.001.00-0.110.236.9410.238.25
Red gram 
1.02
5.43 -5.870.062.021.130.187.56-4.810.24
Green gram 
2.07
3.89 -1.42.854.38-0.062.088.44-1.454.99
Black gram 
4.27
7.98 -2.591.953.72-1.261.6611.99-3.813.64
Horse gram 
1.61
-4.8 -6.06-4.172.91.722.99-2.05-4.45-1.31
Sugarcane 
5.16
2.83 3.73.40.520.780.593.364.514.01
Turmeric 
0.38
3.2 11.352.573.381.350.636.6912.853.22
Coriander 
0.48
-0.89 -4.62-3.65-0.320.67-3.28-1.2-3.99-6.81
Groundnut 
10.65
2.33 -3.830.322.683.473.325.07-0.503.65
Gingelly 
1.35
5.00 -4.720.62-2.24.772.222.69-0.182.85
Cotton 
2.64
3.00 -2.570.44.50.20.937.64-2.381.34
Tapioca 
1.73
3.78 1.263.612.120.771.855.982.045.52
Banana 
  0.22 3.653.156.943.24.487.176.967.77
Tomato 
0.43
6.68 8.147.29        -- 0.060.06       -- 7.127.12
Onion 
0.46
1.12 3.222.340.570.41-1.071.73.641.25
Other 
Crops 
25.35
           
Total 
100
                  
  Source:  Ramasamy et al, 2003 
 Output Price Incentives: Nominal Rat
es of Protection for Major Commodities 
 2.15 For most of the last two decades, produ
cers of rice and cotton in Tamil Nadu have 
been implicitly taxed through price and trad
e policies that kept domestic prices below 
 14border prices
.12 The nominal protection coefficient (NPC) for paddy, calculated as the domestic 
price (in this case the procurement price for common variety paddy), divided by the border price,  
averaged only 0.64 in the 1990s; i.e. the procur
ement price was on average 36 percent below the 
border price (Table  2.8).  Similarly, cotton (kapas) prices  were 26 percent below border prices 
(average across India).  Sugar prices, however, 
were 21 percent higher th
an border prices in the 
1980s and only 8 percent below border prices in the 1990s.  2.16 There has been no implicit taxation of rice in Tamil Nadu through price and trade 
policies in recent years, however
.  NPC™s for paddy in 2001-02 are, in fact, slightly positive.  
Cotton (all-India average) remains taxed relativ
e to international prices, as does groundnut.
13  Prices of refined sugar are likewise near (import parity) border prices.  Thus, estimated trade 
distortions for the two most water-intensive ma
jor crops in Tamil Nadu (paddy and sugar cane) 
have declined, and were mi
nimal in 2001 and 2002.   
 Table  2.8:  Nominal Protection Coefficien
ts for Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 1980-2002 
  RiceaRicebCottonCottonSugarSugarGroundnut
 (paddy)(paddy)(kapas)(kapas)(refined)(refined)(pods)
Importable / 
Exportable ImportImportExportImportExportImportImport
        
1981-19900.831.200.970.871.581.211.31

1991-20000.640.760.800.741.210.920.83
2001-20021.031.060.650.591.471.040.79
        
Note:  a Using procurement price of paddy (common variety). 
b Using wholesale price of paddy (common variety). All NPCs except 
for cotton are measured at TN rural markets, assuming that rural 
market exports to Chennai.  NPCs for cotton are national avera
ges.  Rice: 15% broken, FOB Bangkok.  Groundnuts: C&F Rotterdam (kernels
) converted to pods using 0.7 kgs kernel/ kg pods.  Cotton: 
World prices of lint cotton, converted to value of s
eed cotton (kapas; Sugar: FOB Europe, refined sugar. 
 Source: Gulati and Marayanan (2003); authors' calculations 
Agricultural Inputs: Fertilizer Use and Mechanization 
 Average fertilizer consumption in Tamil Nadu has increased
 over the years with consumption 
per hectare increasing from 107.86 Kg in 1986/87 to
 121.03 Kg in 1999/00, an average annual 
growth rate of 1.90 percent per annum. Aver
age per hectare consumption was  66.7 Kg for 
Nitrogen, 28.33 Kg for Potash and 26.01 Kg 
for phosphorous. Approximately 67 percent of 
households growing crops report use of fertilizers (
Table  2.9).  The proportion of farmers 
reporting use of fertilizers is slightly lower than Punjab and AP, but higher states such as 

Maharashtra and Karnataka. 

                                                      
 12    Note that the nominal protection coefficients 
do not include any adjustment in exchange rates.  
Accounting for the overvaluation of the rupee in the 1980s and early 1990s would raise the estimated 
border price in rupee terms and lowe
r the nominal protection co
efficients in this period.  Thus, the degree 
of taxation on Tamil Nadu agriculture in the 1980s 
and early 1990s is understated in Table  2.8.   
13   The estimated 21 percent implicit taxation of groundnuts relative to world prices may reflect domestic 
constraints in processing and marketing, as well as 
differences in quality of groundnuts for alternative end 
uses (direct consumption and crus
hing for groundnut cake and oil).  
 15   Table  2.9:  Characteristics of Ag
riculture in Variou
s States (1998) 
  Andhra
 PradeshKarnatakaMaharashtraPunjabTamil Nadu
Principal Cropped Area  (ha) 1.332.091.722.600.86
Households Using Tractors/Power 
Tillers 43.53%16.11%13.75%92.38%49.96%
Households Using Fertilizers 70
.59%53.40%56.25%72.10%67.16%
Households Using Pesticides 82.14%63.04%49.74%86.86%86.40%
Households Using Improved Seeds 69.70%69.17%70.31%80.05%66.93%
Households Using Weedicides 24.32%27.97%15.08%78.58%52.70%
Households that Own Electric 
Pumps 
30.21%19.36%28.77%51.03%32.69%
Households that Own Diesel Pumps 5.82%2.30%3.85%38.10%14.71%
Source:  Authors™ calculations using the 
54th round of the NSS (1998).  Households re
ported area cultivated under five principa
l crops 
and the use of various inputs for each  principal crops. 
 2.17 Rates of pesticide consumption appear to be declining over time
 with growing 
awareness of the deleterious health effects of expos
ure to chemicals, the use of organic pesticides 
and the adoption of pest resistant varieties of crops
.  Despite this farmers 
in Tamil Nadu appear to 
be more likely to use pesticid
es and weedicides as compared to farmers in Neighboring states 
such as AP, Karantaka and Maharashtra.  Approximately 53 percent of farmers in Tamil Nadu 
report using weedicides and about 86 percent repor
t using pesticide, insecticides, fungicides etc.  
The proportion of households reporting using pestic
ides is comparable to Punjab.  Approximately 
67 percent of farmers report using improved varieties of seeds. The proportion of farmers using 

improved varieties of seeds in Tamil Nadu is less than most southern Indian states and Punjab 

where close to 80 percent of farmers use improved seed varieties.  
2.18 The degree of mechanization in agriculture 
in Tamil Nadu is still relatively low
 although it is higher than most southern states. According to data from the 54
th round of the NSS 
(1998), only 50 percent of  agricultural households
 in the state used tractors or power tillers 
(Table  2.9).  While the degree of mechanization is re
latively low compared to Punjab where more 
than 90 percent of agricultural households reported using tractors/power tillers it is higher than most southern state including Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra and Karnataka. The majority of 
households  (89 percent)  using tractors or power tillers in Tamil Nadu  rented these services.  
Land  2.1 Current land distribution and use in much
 of Tamil Nadu reflect centuries old 
patterns of settlement and cultivation in the valleys and plains
.14  In pre-colonial society, 
                                                     
 14 Baker (1984) distinguishes a third major region, Kongunad, in western Tamil Nadu (approximating the 
modern districts of Coimbatore and Erode), as a mix of plains and valley geography and society.  P.93f 
 16river valley villages, where agriculture centered on 
irrigated rice, were divided into two exclusive 
groups: the land owning Brahman and Vellala (nobl
es), and the outcaste laborers (usually Pallan 
or Paraiyan) (Baker, 1984:87).  The economy of the 
drier plains with generally poor soils outside 
the valleys was based on livestock, hunting, culti
vation of millet, and non-agricultural activities.
15   2.2 The average farm size (individual holdings) 
in 1995-96 was only 0.91 hectares, with 
52.5 percent of farms less than 0.5 hectares
 (Table  2.10). 74.3 percent of farms were less than 
1.0 hectare, accounting for only 30.2 percent of the land.   
Table  2.10:  Land Distribution in Tamil Nadu, 1995-96 
Size of holding Number Percent
age Area Area Area (Ha) 
(hectares) Of farms of farms
 (hectares)(percent)(average) 
      
Less than 0.5 4,205,41352.49982,35613.45 0.23 
0.5-1.0 1,745,69121.791,227,98816.81 0.70 

1.0 - 2.0 1,233,83615.401,721,28823.57 1.40 
2.0 - 4.0 600,8337.501,622,81022.22 2.70 
4.0 - 10.0 199,7912.491,134,85315.54 5.68 

Greater than 10.0 26,2680.33613,9118.41 23.37 
      
Total (all sizes) 
8,011,832100.007,303,206100.00 0.91 
 Source:  GoTN, 2002a 
Land Resource Policy and Administration   
 2.19 There is no explicit statement of State Land Use policy in Tamil Nadu; the policies 
are implicit in the legislative and administra
tive measures related to the regulation of land 
use.  The Revenue Department administrates all 
the government lands including those vested 
with the various departments of the state gove
rnment.  Following the Tamil Nadu Patta Pass 
Book Act, 1983, private owners of agricultural land 
are issued Patta pass books.  These serve as 
evidence of ownership that facilitates loans fro
m financial institutions, co-operative banks and 
commercial bank. 
2.20 Land reforms in India were designed to (1) to
 enhance the productivity of land (2) to 
ensure distributive justice (3) to create a syst
em of peasant proprietorship and (4) to transfer the incomes of the few to many so
 that the demand for consumer goods would be 
created.  By 1972, laws had been passed in all the 
States to abolish intermediaries. In Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Or
issa, measures in the form of an order for 
staying ejection have been adopted to give tem
porary protection to the tenants. As a result of 
these measures, 92 per cent of the holdings in Indi
a are wholly owned and self-operated.  By the 
year 1972, ceiling legislation had been passed in 
all the States. Land ceilings in Tamil Nadu (4.86 
hectares for irrigated land with two crops; 12.14
 hectares for irrigated land with one crop and 
24.28 hectares for dry land) have relatively little 
effect on land distribution, however, due to 
registration of land in the names of various family
 members, and reportedly even in the names of 
                                                     
 15 ﬁThe importance of agriculture in the valleys made
 control of land the crucial feature of social 
organiztion.  By contrast the crucial feature in the 
plains was control of men– The importance of military 
service and, to a lesser extent, the production of goods and services, laid great stress on the control of men 
and their ability to work or fight.ﬂ Baker, p. 90. 
 17workers (with their knowledge).  Nonetheless, th
e number of farms greater than 10 hectares is 
rather small (0.33 percent), accounti
ng for only 8.41 percent of area (
Table  2.10). 
Livestock  2.21 The performance of the livestock sector has been strong. 
The livestock sector 
(including animal husbandry, poultry and dairy) is
 an important contributor to Tamil Nadu™s 
agricultural growth.  This sectors is also important for rural livelihoods offering a source of 
income and employment. For many rural househ
olds livestock are the main instrument for 
savings and insurance. Livestock also provide a source of power for tilling land and organic 
fertilizer (manure). According to the last census,
 TN had about 5.3 percent of India™s livestock 
population. Thirty-eight percent of the livestock population comprises of cattle, 11 percent of 
buffaloes, 25 percent goat, 20 percent sheep a
nd 2 percent pigs  (Livestock Census, 1997).
16  TN 
ranks second among Indian states in egg producti
on and nineth in terms of milk production.
17  Approximately 6 percent of national milk prod
uction came from TN in 2001/02 and the state 
accounted for 11.9 percent of  India™s egg production. 
2.22 There is significant growth potential for the livestock and poultry sectors arising 
from growing consumer demand.
  With increasing urbanization and growing per capita 
incomes, the demand for animal products (meat, 
eggs and dairy) in Tamil Nadu have been 
increasing. Production of the main animal products
 has also been increasing to meet consumer 
demand.  Milk production in the state has increased from 3.29 million tones in 1986-87 to 4.90 
million tones in 2000-2001. Milk production increased at an average annual rate of 4 percent. Egg 

production has also increased by approximately 
4 percent per annum in the 1990s. Growth of  
meat production has been much slower averagi
ng 1 percent per annum between 1996/97-99/00. 
Cross bread cows contribute to approximately 37 per
cent of the milk produced in the state, while 
indigenous breads and  buffaloes contribute roughly 
26 percent and 37 percent, respectively. Milk 
yields (yield per animal) from crossbred cows of 
5.72 Kg/day are slightly lower than the all-India 
average of 6.36 Kg/day, but significantly lower than
 yields in Punjab (8
.7 Kg/day).  The same 
trend can be observed for yields from buffalo
es which is 3.68 Kg/day. Yield from indigenous 
cows (2.4 Kg/day) are comp
aratively high compared to most India states.   
2.23 Most of the poultry production in the state derives from large commercial units
. 70 percent of  poultry products are produced by 
commercial farmers with 
the remaining 30 percent 
being produced by small holders (personal comm
unication with Secretary, Animal Husbandry). 
While this increases efficiency 
in production, food safety concerns and concerns for animal 
welfare will increase. Environmental effects, pa
rticularly eutrophication from high levels of 
phosphorous and nitrogen runoffs, could become pr
oblematic without proper regulation. Small-
holders may be crowded out of the sector since by its structure the industry lends itself to 
economies of scale. The growth in the poultry i
ndustry has contributed to rapidly increasing 
demand for maize as poultry feed. 
2.24 Unlike poultry production, the dairy industry is still dominated by small-holders.
 Much of the milk produced in the state is ma
rketed through milk producers cooperatives. In 2001-
2002 the state had 8,238 Dairy Cooperative Societies with a membership of approximately 2.04 
million members. The number of dairy coopera
tives and farmer members in Tamil Nadu has 
almost quadrupled since the early 1980s (NDDB, Annual Report, 2000/01). The commercial 

sector produces 30 percent of milk, with small 
holders (who have an average of 1-3 cows) 
                                                     
 16 Livestock population refers to cattle, buffalo, goats, sheep and pigs. 
17 Ranks are computed based on average production in Indian states between 1999 and 2001. 
 18-4.00%
-2.00%
0.00%

2.00%
4.00%
6.00%

8.00%
10.00%
1980-
81/84-85
85/86-
89/90
90/91-
94/95
95/96-
99/00
Growth in Fisheries SDP
Tamil Nadu
All-India
producing 70 percent of milk in the state (p
ersonal communication with Secretary, Animal 
Husbandry).  Recent drought in the state has re
duced fodder production which has implications 
for the quality of milk yields from cows and 
buffaloes. Adequate cold storage and further 
improvements in veterinary services are needed 
for this sector to realize its full potential. 
Fisheries 
 2.25 Tamil Nadu™s fisheries sector has significan
t potential, but its performance has been 
mixed.  
The state has a coastal length of 1,076 km, equi
valent to 15% of India™s coast line and is 
also well-endowed in terms of in-land fisheries.  The inland fisheries sector has about 370,000 ha 
of water spread area, comprising of 52,000 ha of reservoirs, 97,700 ha of major irrigation and 
long seasonal tanks, 158,100 ha of
 short seasonal tanks and ponds 
and 63,000 ha under estuaries, backwaters and swamps.                               
 Figure  2.4:  Growth in Fisheries SGDP 
  
 
 
     
 
                                                Source:  India States Database 
 2.26 The contribution of the fisheries sector to
 total agricultural and allied sector GDP 
has decreased over the past two decades from 
roughly 7% in the early 1980s to 4.5% in 
2001/02 
(Figure  2.4:). Growth in the fisheries sub sector 
has fluctuated and growth rates 
consistently fall below all-India averages.  Pr
oduction is around 0.5 million tones with four-fifths 
of fish production from wild fisheries (marine fi
sheries). The state™s fish
 production accounts for 13.2 percent of total marine fish production and 4 
percent of total in-land fish production in India 
(GoTN, 2001c).  
2.27 Marine fisheries are an important export
 earner for the state and accounted for 
5.5% of total export earnings in 2001
. The coast of Tamil Nadu has also become attractive for 
investment in shrimp culture. However growth 
in shrimp production has slowed down since a ban 
was imposed on shrimp culture in the Coastal Regul
ation Zone (area within 50 metres of the coast 
line) due to growing problems with salinity  (GoTN, 2001c).   
 The Rural Non-farm Sector 
 2.28 The non-farm sector is an important so
urce of income and employment for rural 
households in Tamil Nadu
.  Data from 1993/94 indicate that on average income from non-farm 
sources accounted for 46.4 percent of rural house
holds incomes. The average real per capita 
 190102030405060Income Quintiles
Percentage of Household Income
Cultivation
Agriculture wage Labour
Total Nonfarm sources
Other sources
income in 1993/94 was Rs 4,867. In Tamil 
Nadu the share of non-farm income increases 
monotonically with households wealth. For the 
lowest expenditure quintile, non-farm incomes accounted for 19.8 percent of household incomes, on 
average.  In contrast, income from non-farm 
sources contributed slightly more than half of household income for 
the  wealthiest quintile.                       
  2.29 The Government of Tamil Nadu has enco
uraged development of the non-farm sector through the Tamil Nadu Khadi and V
illage Industries Board established in 1960.  The Board promotes Khadi and Village Industries 
in order to create employment opportunities for 
rural artisans. Khadi industries are involved in the  production of cotton, wool, silk and muslin 
while village industries engage in production ac
tivities that are mineral-, forest-, polymer and 
chemical-, agro-, engineering-, textile-, and service-based. 
The Board provides financial assistance 
to artisans to start their own industries.
 In 2000-01 Khadi and Village Industries provided employment for approximately 1 million worker
s. Among the various industries, almost 71 
percent of employment was in agro-based indus
tries with Palm Gur production alone accounting 
for 60 percent of employment in Khadi and Village industries  (
Figure  2.6:).  Total earnings of 
the Khadi and Village based industries in 2000/01 amounted to approximately Rs 2.7 billion.  
Other important industries in term
s of employment creation were 
pottery, bee-keeping and village 
leather production. 
 Figure  2.5:  Non-farm Income Sha
re in Rural Tamil Nadu, 1993/94 
    
   
      
 
 2.30 Continued growth of the agro-processing sector is likely
. Value added in the agro-
processing sector in Tamil Nadu grew by 
3.4 percent between 1989/90 and 1997/98, the 
latest year for which data is available
  (Table  2.12).
 Population growth, rising incomes, and 
increased urbanization will foster an increasing 
shift in demand from raw, unprocessed products 
to high value processed foods. Food products and 
cotton textiles accounted for 10 percent  and 28 
percent of net value added by the industrial sector
 in the late 1990s (1997/87). By 1997/98 four 
agro-processing industries, cotton spinning, w
eaving and processing, processing, manufacture 
and refining of sugar, processing 
and blending of tea and grain milling accounted for 87 percent 
of value added in the agro-processing sector and clos
e to 80 percent of employment in the sector 
(Figure  2.7:). 
2.31  In order to encourage growth of the agro-processing sector Tamil Nadu has 
recently launched the New Anna Marumalarchi Thittam
. The 2002-03 Budget speech 
announced the restructuring of the existing A
nna Marumalarchi Thittam scheme into the New 
Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003
 20Anna Marumalarchi Thittam which will place 
special emphasis on the agro-processing sector. 
The new scheme in effect since June 2002 encour
ages the development of 
small scale agro-based 
industries such as processing of horticultural prod
ucts, flower based extracts, coir and food 
processing. Under the scheme, investment in agro-based industries w
ill be encouraged in each of 
the 385 Blocks of Tamil Nadu through a packages of subsidies and incentives.  
Figure  2.6:  Employment and Earnings in Khadi and Village Industries, 2000/01 
   Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003. 
 Table  2.11:  Employment by Major Agro-processing Industries, 1989/90-1996/97 
(Millions of  Man Days) 
  Grain 
Milling  Manufacture 
and Refining 
of Sugar 
Processing and 
Blending of 
Tea  Cotton Spinning, 
Weaving and 
Processing in Mills
Other total 
89-90 4.96.72.355.113.482.4
90-91 4.86.72.950.116.781.2
91-92 5.16.12.651.517.582.9
92-93 5.96.12.83.519.037.4
93-94 6.17.23.462.921.0100.6
94-95 4.86.32.962.522.599.0
95-96 5.05.93.056.923.494.2
96-97 6.16.33.668.120.2104.2
Growth (%) 1.8-1.04.66.96.74.8
  Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003. 
020406080KhadiMineral basedIndustries
Forest based
Industries
Polymer and
chemical Agro-basedindustries
Engineeringand Non-conventional 
Textile
Industries
Type of Village Industry
Share of Employment and Earnings (%)
Employment
Earnings
 21 Table  2.12: Value Added in the Agro-processing
 Sector by Major Agro-processing Industries, 
1989/90-1997/98  (Rs Billion in constant 1993/94 Rupees) 
  Grain 
Milling  Manufacture and Refining of 
Sugar Processing and Blending of Tea  
Cotton 
Spinning, Weaving and Processing in Mills Other total 
89-90 0.22.71.611.62.718.8
90-91 0.41.71.312.52.418.4
91-92 0.62.22.39.42.517.0
92-93 0.42.91.310.61.817.1
93-94 0.62.41.512.72.319.4
94-95 0.62.82.112.32.520.2
95-96 0.72.01.29.82.215.9
96-97 0.82.41.612.22.819.9
97-98 0.62.51.520.53.628.8
Growth (%) 
12.61.1-1.24.12.93.4
    
Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003.
   Figure  2.7:  Value Added in the Ag
ro-Processing Sector by Industry 
0%20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
89-9091-9293-9495-9697-98Year
Share of Value Added in Agro-Processing SectorOther
Cotton Spinning, Weaving
and Processing in Mills
Processing and Blending of

Tea 
Manufacture and Refining of

Sugar
Grain Milling 
  Source:  Authors™ calculations usi
ng data in Ramasamy, et al., 2003.
 223. Water for Agriculture 
 3.1 Tamil Nadu is a water scarce state. The annual 
per capita availability of water resources 
of Tamil Nadu is only 900 cubic meters compared 
to an all-India average of 2200 cubic meters. 
The rainfall received by the state is highly variable
 and drought conditions prevail in three out of 
every 10 years.  Water is an essential factor 
of production for agriculture, which consumes 75% 
of the state™s water resources.  Faced with growing scarcity, increasing demand for water from 

industries and commercial uses, and intensifying  
interstate competition for water, improving the 
productivity of water (ﬁgetting more crop from every 
dropﬂ) in irrigated and rainfed agriculture is 
of great urgency in Tamil Nadu.  
3.2 Improving the productivity of water in agriculture needs commitments to policy, 
institutional and management reforms as well as investments in crop research, technology and 
infrastructure. Tamil Nadu has already embarked 
on a process of reform including decentralizing 
water resources management along river basins, fo
rmalizing irrigation management transfer to 
users, revising water tariffs, and promoting wa
ter saving technologies.  Commencing with a brief 
introduction to water resources in the state, th
e following chapter elaborates on recent reforms 
and the challenges that lie ahead for the state to
 increase agricultural growth while meeting the 
needs of other uses.  
Water Resources  
 3.3 Geographically, most of Tamil Nadu is a dr
y plain, with river valleys surrounded by 
low hills.  The normal rainfall in the plains in the state is 925 millimeters per year, concentrated 
during two monsoon seasons-the southwest a
nd the northeast monsoon (Agrostat, 2001).
18 Most 
of the rains from the southwest monsoon extending
 from June through September are blocked by 
mountains (the Western Ghats), on Tamil Nadu™s 
western border with Kerala and Karnataka.  
Except in the southern tip of Tamil Nadu (especi
ally Kanniyakumari district), the southwestern 
monsoons are highly variable. The northeast mons
oon rains, from October through December are 
more reliable and on average account for 47 percent of
 annual rainfall in the state. Little rain falls during the winter (January-Februar
y) or summer (March-May).   
                                                                                 Figure 
 3.1:  Rainfall and Agricultural & Allied GSDP 
 3.4 Rainfall in the state is highly variable and 
has a pronounced effect on the performance of 
the agricultural sector
 (Figure  3.1, Table  3.1). In 
six years between 1980 and 2001 total rainfall was 
less than 90 percent of the average for the two 

decades.  For these years, 
 real agricultural GDP was on average 8.1 percent below trend GDP. A 
regression analysis shows that a one percent 
increase in rainfall relative to the mean is 

associated with a 0.3 percent increase in real 

agricultural GDP relative to the trend agricultural 
GDP. 19   
                                                      
 18 India™s average annual rainfall is 1,100 mm per year. 
19 The regression equation is y=0.001+ 0.298x where y is the percent deviation in agricultural GDP from 
its logarithmic trend value, and x is the percent devi
ation in total rainfall from its mean value over the 
period.  The standard deviation of the estimated coefficient on x is 0.100, t-statistic is 2.97 and the R
2=0.31.   
-30%-20%
-10%0%10%20%
30%40%19801982
198419861988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000Percentage Deviation from 
the MeanTotal Rainfall
Agricultural  & Allied GSDP
Source:  Authors™ calculations 
 23 Table 
 
3.1:  Rainfall in Tamil Nadu 
      Share of Normal 
Season Months Normal RainfallAnnual Rainfall 
    (mms) (percent) 
    
Winter rains Jan Œ Feb 42.2 4.5 
Summer rains Mar Œ May 136.5 14.8 

Southwest monsoon Jun Œ Sep 307.6 33.3 
Northeast monsoon Oct Œ Dec 438.7 47.4 
    
Total Rainfall   925 100 
  
3.5 Tamil Nadu has 17 river basins
 (including groups of minor basins), all flowing eastwards 
from the Western Ghats and Deccan plateau.
20  The major rivers in the state are the Cauvery, 
Palar, Vellar, Vaigai and Tambaraparani. The Cauv
ery delta, the largest river basin in the state, 
has been the rice bowl of Tamil Nadu for over 1500 years since the construction of the Grand 
Anicut (dam), which diverted water from the Ca
uvery to a system of irrigation canals. Water 
from the Cauvery is used to irrigate approxima
tely 20 million hectares of land in Tamil Nadu. 
Cauvery water is shared with Ka
rnataka (located upstream) and is the subject of ongoing disputes 
between the two states.   3.6 The state™s water resources are divided near
ly evenly between surface water (23.6 
billion cubic meters) and groundwater (22.3 billion cubic meters)
.  Utilization rates are 
estimated to be 93% for surface water and 60% for groundwater. In many parts of the state, the 
rate of extraction of groundwater has exceeded recharge rates contributing to falling water tables.  
Out of 385 blocks in the state 23 percent are 
dark (extraction exceeding 100 percent of the recharge), another 23 percent of blocks are grey (extraction exceeding 65 percent of the 
recharge). The dark and grey blocks are particularly concentrated in the Western and North-
Western Zones.  3.7 Water quality issues are of increasing importance
. Effluents discharged from industries 
involved in dying and bleaching, as well as increasi
ng use of fertilizers and pesticides, have had a 
major impact on surface water quality, soils and grou
ndwater.  For example, in the Noyyal river, 
a tributary of the Cauvery river, uncontrolled disch
arge of total dissolved solids have adversely affected agriculture as pollutants have contaminated water sources and soils.   
Overview of  Water Use in Agriculture 
 3.8 Most farmers own only irrigated land or
 non-irrigated land; few farmers own 
significant amounts of both irrigated and non-irrigated land
.  According to data from the 55
th round of the Indian National Sample Survey (N
SS), in 1999/00 approximately 25 percent of 
farms in Tamil Nadu used little or no irrigation; 
by contrast, 65 percent of farms consisted of 
almost entirely irrigated land.  Only about 10 percent of farms had significant shares (at least 20 
percent) of both irrigated and non-irrigated la
nd.  Thus, agricultural programs that focus on 
irrigated crops will generally not directly bene
fit 25 percent of farm households.  Similarly, 
                                                     
 20 Some of these basins, including the Cauvery,
 are partially located in neighboring states. 
 24programs that focus on non-irrigated crops will gene
rally not directly benefit the 65 percent of 
farm households with essentia
lly no non-irrigated land (
Figure  3.2,Table  3.2)  Figure  
3.2:  Area Cultivated by Sh
are of Irrigated Land Per Farm 
0102030405060
7080900-20%20-40%40-60%60-80%80-
100%Irrigated Area as a Share of 
Cultivated Area 
Thousand HectaresIrrigated
Non-irrigated
 Table 
 3.2:  Access to Irrigation by Farms 
Percent of Cultivated 
Area Irrigated Avera
ge share of 
irrigated land 
per farm (%) 
Distribution o
f Farms (%) 
Average Farm Size 
(Ha) 
0-20% 0.43 24.80 0.69 
20-40% 30.75 2.27 1.7 
40-60% 51.19 4.09 1.34 
60-80% 67.99 4.15 1.53 
80-100% 99.23 64.69 0.85 
    
Total 71.69 100.00 0.88 
Source:  Authors™ Calculations from the 55
th Round of the NSS (1999/00)
  Rainfed Agriculture 
 3.9 Rainfed agriculture accounts for 45 percent of the gross cultivated area of 6.5 million 
hectares in Tamil Nadu and approximately 25 percent of farmers in the state are engaged in 
rainfed agriculture. Despite its importance as a source of income and employment, productivity 
in rainfed agriculture has been low. Tamil 
Nadu has implemented a number of centrally 
sponsored and donor funded watershed devel
opment schemes aimed at improving the production 
potential of rainfed agriculture. These schemes 
include the Drought Prone Areas Programme 
(DPAP), the National Watershed Developmen
t Project for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA), the 
Integrated Wasteland Development Pr
ogramme (IWDP) and the DANIDA funded Comprehensive Watershed Development Projects.  
3.10 The DPAP implemented in Tamil Nadu since 
the early 1970s promotes natural resource 
management in watersheds so as to mitigate th
e adverse effects of drought, prevent further 
degradation and generate empl
oyment through non-farm activities. IWDP has the broad 
 25objectives of sustainability, equity and environm
ental conservation to meet timber, fodder and 
fuel needs and to increase employment opportun
ities for Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribes and 
other socio-economically disadvantaged groups. This
 program has been implemented in the state 
since 1993/94 in non-DPAP blocks. NWDPRA focu
ses on sustainable production of biomass and 
restoration of ecological balance in watershe
ds and has been operational since 1990-91. This 
initiative has recently been restru
ctured into the Watershed Areas Rainfed Agricultural Systems 
Approach  (WARASA). All of these programs are jointly funded by the Central government and 
GoTN, with the center responsible for at least 75 percent of the costs. 
3.11 The recently launched Comprehensive Wasteland Programme is a major initiative 
promoted by the GoTN which holds potential 
for improving water productivity in rainfed 
lands.  The program aims to reclaim current fallow wastelands through a micro watershed 
development program focusing on 
soil and water conservation. 
Roughly 17 percent of Tamil 
Nadu™s land area is classified as wastelands.
21 The program has two main components.  The first 
promotes participatory watershed 
development of  patta lands.
22  The second component seeks to 
encourage development of government owned wast
elands by corporate houses, small companies, 
cooperatives and Federations of Women™s Self Help Groups.  
3.12 Farmers participating in the participatory wa
tershed approach will receive a subsidy to 
partially cover costs for planting and irrigating 
horticultural and agro-forestry crops such as 
mangoes, cashew, sapota, tamarind, neem, silk 
cotton in the watersheds. The involvement of 
corporations in wasteland development will be
 encouraged by offering 30 year leases for 
wastelands of up to 1,000 acres to corporations that
 are interested in raising horticultural crops or 
bio-mass plantations on wastelands. Corpora
tions leasing land under this program will pay 
concessional amounts of rent proportional to land value for use of the land.   
3.13 Although watershed projects have been widely promoted throughout India the 
success of these projects in terms of curbing 
land degradation, improvi
ng the productivity of rainfed agriculture and reducing rural poverty has been limited
.  Reviews of watershed 
development programs in India have found that
 successful approaches to watershed development 
have entailed extensive community participation with sound technical inputs. The evidence also 
reveals that benefits of these projects have b
een skewed towards landowners, with landless people 
benefiting indirectly.  In some cases women and 
landless may have actually been made worse off 
as their access to common property resources may be restricted as a result of  project 
interventions. Adequately addressing these equity 
issues remains a challenge for governments and 
NGOs involved with implementing watershed projects.
 It has also been found that subsidies for 
soil and water conservation, and the opportuniti
es for employment, can induce farmers to accept 
soil conservation strategies that they do not really want and are hence difficult to sustain in the 

long run once the project ends (Kerr et al, 2002). 
 Tailoring conservation strategies to practices 
that farmers really want will be important in 
ensuring the success and long run sustainability of 
future initiatives.  For programs such as the Comprehensive Wasteland Programme, it is also 
important that the state adopts a basin perspective in implementation to ensure that these 
initiatives do not have negative impact
s on downstream human and ecological uses
.    3.14 Rainwater harvesting is being promoted on a large scale in the state in an effort to 
supplement ground water resources
. As much of the rainfall is received in a very short period, 
                                                     
 21 Wastelands include barren and uncultivable land, cultivable waste, permanent pastures and other grazing 
lands, other fallow lands, 50 per cent of current fallows and 40 per cent of dry land. 
 22 Private lands where owners are issued a Patta Pass Book 
 26rain water harvesting offers the ability to capture
 a transitory resource and can provide sufficient 
water to grow less water-intensive crops.
23 In urban areas, rainwater harvesting is a potential 
source of water for consumption purposes.  As of
 July, 2003, the Government of Tamil Nadu has 
passed an ordinance requiring all buildings in the state to install rainwater harvesting structures 
before the monsoon.   
 Irrigated Agriculture 
 3.15 Tamil Nadu has a net irrigated area of 3 million hectares (1999/00).  Most irrigated lands 
are only irrigated for a single season and the state™
s irrigation intensity of 121 percent is relatively 
low.24  Today the state is equally reliant on 
surface and groundwater sources for irrigation, although its reliance on groundwater sources has been steadily increasing (
Figure  3.3).  
Approximately 30 percent of the net irrigated ar
ea is irrigated by water from canals.  An 
additional 21 percent is irrigated by tanks, while 
wells are used to irrigate 49 percent of the net 
irrigated area. The remaining area is irrigated by other sources such as streams and springs. Net 

irrigated area has increased by about 10 percen
t in the past two decades from 2.7 million ha in 
1981/82, due mainly to a 39 percent increase in area
 irrigated by wells.  Over the same period, 
area irrigated by canals and tanks decreased 
by approximately 4 percent and 14 percent, 
respectively.  

 Figure  3.3:  Net Irrigated Area by Source of Irrigation 
-0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
1981-821991-921999-2000
Net Irrigated Area (Millions of Hectares)
Other
Wells
Tanks
Canals
     
Source:  CMIE Yearbook, Various Years 
Surface irrigation 
 3.16 Tamil Nadu has constructed more than 85 la
rge and medium dams since independence.  
As the surface irrigation potential has virtually been exhausted, mode
rnizing and rehabilitating 
existing systems is crucial to improve the efficiency of surface irrigation. The majority of canal 
systems in the state are old and have very poor 
efficiency as a result of seepage and silting in the 
canals (GoTN, 2001a).  In recent years the state 
has undertaken some major canal modernization 
projects with the aide of World Bank funding unde
r the Water Resources Consolidation Project.   
                                                      
 23 On average there are 30 rainy days during the southwest monsoon and 55 rainy days during the northeast 
monsoon.   
24 The all-India irrigation intensity is 132%.   
 273.17 In the 1960s, tank irrigation accounted for almost 37 percent of net irrigated area in 
Tamil Nadu. Area irrigated with tanks has steadily 
declined over time, however, because of 
siltation in tank beds and supply 
channels, encroachments in the 
tank bund, foreshore, and supply 
channels, and damaged sluices, weirs and bunds,. There are currently 41,948 tanks in the state of 
TN irrigating an area of 0.63 million hectares, the average area irrigated by a tank is 15.1 ha.  Due 
to water shortages a large number of tanks in the 
state are defunct.  A recent study found that in a 
10 year period, tanks are only full for 2 years, they are partially full for 5 years and fail for 3 out 

of 10 years. Water markets are becoming increasingly important in the tank command areas and 

provide a means to supplement inadequate tank i
rrigation water particularly at the end of the 
paddy season. Farmers normally spend about 20 percent of their rice crop income on buying 

water from well owners.  Since 
only 15 percent of farmers own wells in the tank command, 
demand for supplemental irrigation is high (Palanisami, 2003).   
Groundwater Irrigation  3.18 Factors including rural electrification, the availability of affordable irrigation pump sets 
and cheap or free electricity for agriculture 
have contributed to the increasing reliance on 
groundwater for irrigation in Tamil Nadu.  
Both the number of wells and area irrigated by them 
registered significant increases 
over the years. The number of wells (dug and tube wells) had 
increased from 1.68 million during 1981-82 to 1.83 million in 1999-2000, the area irrigated by them 
rose from 1.05 million ha. to 1.45 million ha. 
 3.19 Overexploitation of groundwater resources 
is a major problem facing the state. Of a total of 1.8 million wells in the state, approxima
tely 10 percent are now defunct. The depth of 
bore wells in hard rock area has increased to 
as much as 600ft to 1000ft.  Today, use of dug wells 
as a source of irrigation is only possible in canal
 and tank command areas; only bore wells remain 
operational in hard rock areas (mainly in the western part of the state).
25  Due to acute water scarcity the Government of Tamil Nadu has recen
tly announced its plans 
to ban the drilling of bore wells, particularly in hard rock areas. This
 however has had a perverse effect as farmers are 
rushing to drill additional wells before the ban 
is officially imposed. Spacing norms have been 
prescribed based on the guidelines issued by 
NABARD (National Bank for Agricultural and 
Rural Development). Dug wells must be at least 150 
m apart; deep tube wells must be at least 600 
m apart. These spacing norms for the construction 
of new structures for minor irrigation purposes 
are applicable throughout the state for wells that
 are constructed with the aide of institutional 
finance. Institutions  3.20 Institutional weaknesses undermined proper management and development of 
water resources in Tamil Nadu
. Institutional arrangements did 
not adequately address water 
resources management, allocation and planning.  
There has also been a lack of expenditure 
prioritization; inadequate priority to and fundi
ng for operations and ma
intenance (O&M) has led to rapid deterioration of surface irrigation. Farm
er involvement in the operation and maintenance 
of irrigation systems has been minimal. Recently, 
however, effort has been made to address many 
of the policy and institutional issues plaguing the water sector.  
3.21 The state is now undertaking 
comprehensive water planning on a river basin basis
 and 
has decentralized water resource management along 
river basins.  The Public Works Department 
has been divided into the 
Water Resources Organization (WRO) 
and the Buildings 
                                                     
 25 Personal communication with K. Palanisami (TNAU). 
 28Organization in 1995.
 The WRO is to be formalized as a separate agency with a specialized cadre 
of staff in 2004.
 Chief Engineers of the WRO have been reorganized along a river basin basis and 
Government Orders setting up the Palar Basin 
Development and Management Board and the 
Thambaraparani Basin Developm
ent and Management Board were issued in January, 2000. 
Preparation of macro-level basin development plans and formulation of decision support systems 
for development and management of the water 
resources of the state has been underway since 
1997.  
3.22 The state has also drafted a Water Policy and steps for irrigation management 
transfer have also been initiated
. The Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation Systems 
Bill was passed  by the State Legislative Assembly 
in May, 2000. The state was one of the first in 
India to pass a Groundwater Regulation and Management Act. Development of requisite skills in 
environmental aspects of water resources for staf
f in specified units of the Public Works 
Department has been a s
ubstantial achievement.  
Irrigation Management Transfer  3.23 Traditionally rural communities have played a 
central role in the management of water 
resources in Tamil Nadu. Informal arrangements 
under the system of ﬁkudimaramathu™ were 
widespread for the maintenance and management 
 of irrigation tanks up until the middle of the 
19th century. Various other spontaneously created fa
rmer organizations also played an important 
part in the management of canal systems, as well.    
3.24 Between 1988 and 1994 as part of the 
Command Area Development Programme, the 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural Engineering Department 
organized Water User Associations in five 
major systems. By 1994, 3,300 outlet level WU
As and 118 distributory canal level WUAs had 
been formed, though most were not functioning well (Brewer et al., 1999).  The motivation for 
formally transferring irrigation management to 
canal irrigation users in the state was largely 
driven by the pressure of maintaining canal syst
ems in a situation of fiscal stress, increasing  
inter-sectoral competition for water resources, 
and advice from the World Bank as part of the 
WRCP project.  3.25 To enable management transfer to farmers, the Tamil Nadu Farmers Management 
of Irrigation  Systems Bill was passed  by the State Legislative Assembly  in May, 2000
.   
This Act will be in force in an area coveri
ng 1.5 million hectares in the system command areas 
under the management and control of WRO.   
3.26 The Tamil Nadu Farmers Management of Irrigation Systems' (FMIS) Bill created a three-
tier system management organization, including WUAs at the outlet, WUAs at the 500 hectare 
command levels and a joint management committe
e(JMC) (a committee including representatives 
of the WUAs and of key government agencies) at the project level.
26  The Bill also allows for the 
full or partial transfer of O&M responsib
ilities to these bodies.  Each WUA has complete 
responsibility for water distributio
n and maintenance in the area 
under its jurisdiction. The JMC 
is afforded the responsibility of deciding on wa
ter allocations and distribution each season and for 
solving problems as they arise.    
3.27 Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and evaluations 
of its impact  in Tamil Nadu are yet to be carri
ed out.  However, there is a growing body of 
evidence on the impact of IMT from other states in 
India which is likely to be relevant for Tamil 
                                                     
 26 The JMC™s are known as Farmer Councils 
 29A recent study undertaken by the International 
Water Management Institute (IWMI) and the 
Gujarat Institute of Development Research (GIDR)
 sheds some important insights into pro-poor 
IMT in large-scale canal irrigation systems.  The 
study is based on a survey of 700 landowning and 
tenant farmers from seven WUA™s in the two states. The study found that IMT in AP and Gujarat 
led to improved access to water for 15% and 25
% of farmers surveyed and extension of the 
irrigated area for 2% and 3% of farmers in the tw
o states, respectively. Ho
wever, the authors also 
find that poor farmers are less 
informed about their rights and tend to loose out on many of the 
potential benefits of IMT.   
 The report makes the following recommendations in terms of making IMT more pro-poor.   
 1. The rights of farmers need to
 be clearly defined.  Individual farmers within the WUA 
should have equal decision making power regardless of farm size. 
2. The awareness of poor farmers and access to 
information on the IMT process should be 
raised.  Differences in access to information 
between poor and wealthy farmers contribute 
to inequities. Wealthy farmers tend to be better informed of their rights and 

responsibilities as WUA members and participate more in the decision-making processes.  

Small farmers were more likely to be unaware 
of the existence of WUAs.  The absence of 
small farmers from committee and general mee
tings means that they are excluded from 
key decisions taken within the WUA including decisions on the use of funds, site 

selection for R&R (Resettlement and Rehabilitation), future self-management of water 
distribution etc.  
3. The election process within the WUA should be
 competitive and transparent.  Election of 
new presidents and committee 
members should be vote-based rather than consensus-
based, to promote competition between several candidates. 
4. The levels of participation (in WUA elections, decision-making processes, fee collection 

etc) by farm size and location should be monitored.. Farm size has proven to be a good 
indicator of relative wealth and monitoring 
participation by farm size provides a good 
indicator of equity trends.   
 Source:  van Koppen, Parathas
arathy and Safiliou, 2003. 
Nadu as WUAs and JMCs begin to play a larger 
role in the management of irrigation systems 
(Text Box  3.1).  
 Text Box 
 3.1:  Pro-poor Irriga
tion Management Transfer 
Water and Electricity Charges 
 3.28 Tamil Nadu has an extremely complicated system of water charges for surface 
irrigation compared to most Indian states
.  Currently there are 188 water rates  (133 for wet 
lands and 55 for dry lands) for farmers depe
nding on soil type, irrigation source, crop grown, 
season etc. Currently water rates  form part of 
the land revenue collected from farmers by village 
administrative officers.  Apart from the basic wa
ter rate there is a local cess and a local cess 
surcharge levied as a multiple of the basic water ra
te paid by farmers.  The revenue from the local 
cess and local cess surcharge is transferred to Panchayat bodies for general expenditures.  
3.29 At present the revenue department is involve
d in both assessments of water charges and 
collection.  The VAOs (village officials) are supposed to inspect the field and record the cropped area, the area under government sources of irrigati
on (e.g. canals, tanks, etc.) and crop conditions. 
A sample check is conducted by higher officials such as the Revenue Inspector/Deputy Tasildars.  
 30At the end of the agricultural year (fasli year),
 the accounts are prepared and water charges are 
collected along with the land revenue.  The my
riad of water rates provide considerable 
discretionary power to assessors.   
 3.30 Until recent revisions, water rates had been untouched since 1962
. Beginning in July 
2003, however, an additional water charge of Rs
 150/ha ,de-linked from any additional cess, was 
imposed.  Thus the farmer will pay the original ch
arge plus the Rs 150/ha.  In addition, the FMIS 
Act empowers the water users™ associations to ch
arge users between Rs 250/ha to Rs 500/ha.  
This additional charge can be retained by the 
WUA for operation and maintenance of the systems 
turned over to them. 

 
3.31 In 1999/00 total O&M expenditures on irriga
tion amounted to Rs 45.6 Crores.  Total 
revenue collected was roughly Rs 11 Crores. Henc
e cost recovery was less than 25 percent (
Table  3.3).    Table 
 3.3:  Irrigation Expenditures and Revenues (1998/99-2000/01) 
 Command
Area ('000 ha) 
O&M expenditures and 
Recoveries  
(Rs. Crore) 
O&M expenditures  
(Rs/ha)   98/99 99/00 00/01 98/99 99/00 00/01 
O&M Works Expenditures 
       
  Major 737.8 36.89 14.11 15.09 500 191 205 
  Medium 824.4 18.34 18.21 18.26 222 221 221 
  Minor  729.9 11.20 12.23 12.23 153 168 168 
  Total  2292.1 66.43 44.55 45.58 290 194 199 
Cost Recovery 
       
Recovery from major & medium  8.25 8.25 8.50    
Recovery from minor  2.63 2.60 2.49    
Total Recovery  10.88 10.85 10.99    
Cost recovery as percent O&M works  
expenditure  16% 24% 24%    
Sources: Expenditure data from WRO, GOTN; 
Revenue data from RBI Bulletin on State Fina
nces, Dec. 2000 as cited  in Palanisami, 
2002. 
 3.32 Low water charges and poor cost recovery
 has meant that canal irrigation users 
have received an implicit subsidy
. In 2000/01 the implicit irrigation subsidy (defined as the 
difference between O&M expenditures and actual co
llection of water charges) amounted to Rs 
333.5 million. Based on an estimated gross canal 
irrigated area of 0.87 million hectares this 
translates into a per hectare subsidy of  Rs 649.
27 3.33 The vast majority of rural households in Tamil Nadu do not benefit directly from 
canal irrigation subsidies; in fact only 7 percent of rural households (15 percent of 
households cultivating crops) enjoy these implicit subsidies
.  However, the distribution of 
canal irrigation subsidies among households that use canal irrigation is less regressive than in 

other major Indian states (World Bank, 2003a). 
In Tamil Nadu over 90 percent of farmers using 
canal irrigation are marginal and small farmers and these farmers capture approximately 76 
                                                     
 27 Exact data on gross canal irrigated area are not available.  Gross canal irrigated area is computed as the 
net canal irrigated area multiplied by the intensity of irrigation  (1.2062). 
 31percent of the canal irrigation subsidy. The aver
age subsidy received by households using canal 
irrigation in 2000/01 was Rs 493.67.  Owing to larg
er farm sizes, large farmers enjoy average 
subsidies that are more than four times as large 
as those enjoyed by marginal and small farmers  
(Table  3.4).   
 Table 
 
3.4:  Distribution of Canal Irrigation
 Subsidies in Tamil Nadu  (2001/02) 
Size of landholding 
Average 
farm size 
(Ha) 
% of Ag HHs 
using canals 
Distribution 
of HH using 
canals (%) 
Distribution 
of Canal 
Irrigated Area
Subsidy/HH 
(S1) 
All  0.96 15.4 100.0 100.0 493.7 
Marginal (<1 Ha) 0.47 12.6 81.8 52.2 314.9 
Small (1-<2 Ha) 1.33 1.9 12.4 24.1 957.4 
Medium (2-<4 Ha) 2.47 0.7 4.6 14.5 1561.74 
Large (>=10 Ha) 5.30 0.2 1.2 9.2 3885.9 
 Source:  Authors™ computations using the 54
th round of the NSS (1998). Households that
 cultivated crops anded own less than 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as marginal farmers, those owning 1 
to less than 2 Ha were classified as small farmers, those with
 2 and less than 4 Ha are classified as medium farmers.  Households 
owning 4 or more hectares are classified as large farmers.  
Note: HH indicates household.  Ag HH (agricultural house
holds) are any households that reported cultivating crops. 
Agricultural Power Tariffs 
 3.34 Until recently farmers pumping groundwater 
for irrigation with the use of electric 
pump sets have benefited 
from free electricity.  Free electricity for agricultural consumers 
coupled with irrigators not internalizing the envi
ronmental costs of their 
water use, has reduced 
incentives for conservation (encouraging over ex
traction of groundwater) and encouraged the 
cultivation of water-intensive crops. Provision of 
free electricity for agricultural power consumers 
has also contributed to the deteriorating finances of the state™s power sector affecting the 
economy™s growth and fiscal health.   
3.35 In Tamil Nadu, as in the rest of India, the electricity tariff charged from industrial and commercial consumers cross-subsidizes 
domestic and agricultural consumers
.  This policy has contributed to rapid expansion in consumption from subsidized categories and 
stagnation in consumption from subsidizing cat
egories (World Bank, 2003).  Industries, 
commercial users and even many domestic consumers 
have had to make large investments in self 
generation capability which is highly inefficient.
  This, along with the cross subsidy, has an 
impact on the competitiveness of the state™s industries and economy.  Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Board™s financial distress has contained its ab
ility to make investments, resulting in uneven 
quality of supply and generation shortages.  
3.36 Apart from these environmental and fiscal issues, the distribution of power 
subsidies to farmers is also a concern, since 
the subsidy reaches only the 16 percent of Tamil 
Nadu farmers who own pump sets. The vast majority of rural households have not benefited 
directly from agricultural power subsidies because they do not own electric pump sets. The 
majority of electric pump set owners are small and marginal farmers (79.4 percent), 14 percent 
are medium farmers and 6 percent are large farmers (
Table  3.5). 
28  It is important to note, 
                                                     
 28 Households that reported cultivating crops and own le
ss than 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as marginal 
farmers, those owning 1 to less than 2 Ha were classi
fied as small farmers, those with 2 and less than 4 Ha 
are classified as medium farmers.  Households owning 
4 or more hectares are classified as large farmers. 
 32though, that insufficient new investment and main
tenance have made rural electric supply erratic 
in many places.  Surveys in other states in Indi
a indicate that farmers would be willing to pay for 
electricity, provided that it was more reliable (World Bank, 2001). 
 3.37 In 2001/2002 agricultural power consumers 
in Tamil Nadu received a subsidy of Rs 
27.09 billion.29 According to available data, total official power consumption by agricultural 
consumers was 9,484 million Kwh and the average 
cost of supplying power to farmers was Rs 
3.05/Kwh. Although small and marginal farmers c
onstitute the majority of electric pump set 
owners in Tamil Nadu, medium and large farm
ers (representing 21 percent of all agricultural 
pump set owners) receive a disproportionately larg
e share of the total agricultural power subsidy 
compared to their representation in the population 
(i.e. while medium and large farmers represent 
21% of electric pumpset owners, they operate 
48 percent of the area irrigated by electric pump 
sets) (Table  3.5).30 Poor rural households in Tamil Nadu receive less than 17% of the agricultural 
power subsidy.  Table 
 3.5:  Distribution of Agricultural Po
wer Subsidies in Tamil Nadu (2001/02) 
Farm size 
Distribution of 
electric pump 
set owners (%) 
Distribution of 
area irrigated by electric pumps (%) 
Total subsidy 
received by Farm 
Size (Rs/year in 
Billions) 
Avera
ge subsid
y  per pump set 
owner (Rs/year) 
Marginal (<1 ha) 55.53 26.84 7.27 13,092.79 
Small (1-2 ha) 23.84 24.89 6.74 28,276.87 
Medium (2-4 ha) 14.1 24.66 6.68 47,371.37 
Large (>=4 ha) 6.53 23.62 6.4 97,972.53 
Total  100 100 27.09 27,090.00 
Source:  54
th round of the NSS (1998). Households that
 reported cultivating crops and own less than
 1 hectare (Ha) were classified as 
marginal farmers, those owning 1 to less than 2 Ha were classifi
ed as small farmers, those with 2 and less than 4 Ha are classi
fied as 
medium farmers.  Households 
owning 4 or more hectares are classified 
as large farmers. HH represents household
  3.38 In March 2003, The Tamil Nadu Electrici
ty Regulatory Commission (TNERC) 
notified its first tariff order, reducing the cross-subsidy on electricity with the introduction 
of an agricultural tariff
.  After 12 years of free power to farmers, the new tariff order has 
introduced a flat rate for unmetered connections
 of Rs.250 per HP per annum and a charge of 
Rs.0.20/kWh for metered connections. The gove
rnment also announced an income support 
scheme for small and marginal farmers.  This was 
a significant step toward creating a more direct 
and transparent system of subsidies to farmers a
nd other target groups and ensuring the separation 
                                                     
 29 Estimates from Rajesh Sinha. The cost of supp
ly excludes depreciation (a non-cash expenses).
 30 The analysis of agricultural power subsidies in 
Tamil Nadu presented is based on data from the 54
th round (1998) of the Indian National Sample Survey (NSS).
 30 This round of the NSS
 included a module on 
Common Property Resources, Sanitation and Hygiene whic
h contained information on cultivation practices 
of households, and the ownership and use of irrigation technology (electric pumps, diesel pumps, canals, 
and conjunctive sources) in
 cultivating five principal crops. By 
using the amount of area irrigated by 
electric pumps as a proxy for the benefits of subsidized
 electricity, these data can be used to examine the 
distribution of agricultural power subsidies across vari
ous landholding categories. In reality, in addition to 
farm size, power consumption by different groups of farmers is likely to depend on the water requirements 
of crops grown, the depth of the water table, and 
the availability, reliability and quality of the power 
supply. The magnitude of agricultural power subsidies goin
g to different land holding categories can be 
estimated by combining data on the ownership of electric pump sets, the distribution of area irrigated by 
electric pumps by land holding, and an estimat
e of the total agricultural power subsidy. 
 33of commercial operation of the power utility fr
om the need for subsidy. However, the 
reintroduction of agriculture power tariff became
 a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu during 
the recent national election, forcing the governme
nt which suffered severe electoral loss for the 
national parliament seats to reverse the policy. 
 3.39 Under the income support scheme, GoTN 
provided small and marginal farmers a 
transfer of up to Rs.1250 per year.  However, this disbursement 
was restricted to Rs.1000 in the case of small and marginal farmers owning pump sets of 3 HP capacity.   These farmers, 0.94 
million, accounted for about 57% of the agricultural 
connections or 12% of farmers.  This direct 
subsidy would have amounted to 
about Rs.1 billion for farmers. 
3.40 On June 10, 2003,  the Central government 
enacted the Electricity Act 2003 (Act) which 
replaces the earlier central laws on electricity viz. the Indian Electricity Act-1910, Electricity 

Supply Act-1948, and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act of 1998. The new act is 

expected to have a far reaching impact on the 
power sector in India (World Bank, 2003).  The 
provision for mandatory metering of supply of el
ectricity within two years will put pressure on 
States to meter agricultural consumers.  TNEB has started metering new agriculture connections 

since July 1, 2002.  Like rest of India, mete
ring the 1.65 million existing agricultural consumers 
in the state is politically challenging, and is exp
ected to take time.  However 100% metering is a 
mandatory requirement under the Act and an essential
 pre-requisite to improve the information on 
power supply and consumption.  
 Full metering of retail consump
tion along with bulk metering is 
also required to establish energy accountability among utility staff.  Metering of agriculture 

would be the first step towards better targeting of the agriculture subsidy based on actual 

consumption and provide better incentives for effi
cient usage of scarce water resources in Tamil 
Nadu.    The Impact of  Water, Agricultural Power 
and Fertilizer Subsidies on Incentives in TN 
Agriculture  3.41 Government policies have major effects on crop profitability in India
.  Trade policies (tariffs, export subsidies, and quantitative restric
tions) affect domestic market prices of local  
commodities that compete with international goods. 
 Moreover, agricultural-related subsidies (the 
national fertilizer subsidy, inadequate cost recove
ry in irrigation systems, electricity subsidies) 
and investments involve major public expenditures.     
3.42 In order to examine the impacts of major 
policies on incentives in agriculture, this 
section presents measures of crop profitability wi
th and without subsidies and other market 
distortions.  Given the importance of increasing water e
fficiency in agriculture, a major focus of 
the analysis is on the effects of changes in irriga
tion costs (water charges in canals and electricity 
charges for wells).  The impact of other major 
policies is also considered through estimates of 
crop productivity at economic prices (i.e. at pr
ices that reflect the opportunity cost of each 
resource).   3.43 The analysis is based on costs of cultiva
tion and crop budgets (average of 1999/2000 and 2000/01) as calculated from farmer surveys by th
e Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) 
for selected crops and sites.  These sites are chosen as representative of each crop under the 
irrigation system specified.  It should be noted th
at costs and returns of individual farmer fields 
depend on particular soil conditions
, local rainfall, farm management skills, and other factors.   
3.44 The amount of water used and its margin
al (operational) cost varies considerably 
across types of irrigation and crops
 (Table  3.6).  Sugar cane requires the most water (1800 
mms/unit area) and occupies the land essentially y
ear-round.  Paddy requires 135 mms/unit area 
in only 4 months. Cotton and groundnuts require le
ss than half the water of paddy.  Financial 
 34costs of irrigation to the farmer (not including capital costs) vary from about 289 Rs/ha for paddy 
under canal irrigation
31 to 1,250 Rs/ha (the annual tax on a 5 horsepower pump set) for sugar 
cane and banana.  (Pump set taxes for crops that
 are grown as part of a two-crop sequence are 
estimated as one half of the annual charges for pump sets, i.e. 625 Rs/ha.)  
3.45 Estimates of the full marginal cost of 
irrigation under meter charges vary more 
substantially, given the large variation in estimated electricity use
.  Electricity use for paddy 
irrigated solely with pumps is more than five 
times that of paddy irri
gated by tanks with only 
supplemental irrigation from pumps.  Likewise, est
imated electricity use for groundnut and cotton 
irrigation by pumps is only about half that for 
paddy given lesser water requirements.  Estimated 
economic costs of irrigation (excluding capital co
sts) for paddy irrigated by wells is about 10 
times the estimated economic costs of canal irriga
tion (4600 Rs/ha for pumps compared with 450 
Rs/ha for canals).32   3.46 Given variations in costs as well as value of
 output, net financial returns per hectare of rice, sugar cane, cotton and groundnuts unde
r various forms of irrigation range from 
9,849 Rs/ha for rice cultivation under tank and well irrigation to 17,956 Rs/ha for sugar 
cane with well irrigation (Table  3.7). These costs and financial returns of cultivation for irrigation with pumps are adjusted to include the tax on electric motors which is planned to take 
effect in late 2003.        
3.47 For well irrigation, the tax on pumpsets (a
djusted for the number of crops grown on 
the land) is equal to only 4.9 to 6.5 percent of
 net returns to land and management with no 
irrigation costs.  These figures represent the reduction in 
crop profitability in these systems if no 
direct payments are given to offset the new tax 
on pumpsets.  If a system of meters is used and 
electricity costs remain at 0.2 Rs/kw-hr, then elect
ricity charges as a percentage of returns to land 
and management with no irrgation costs actually falls to 0.8 to 2.3 percent.   

3.48 However, if electricity char
ges are raised to the estima
ted marginal economic price 
of electricity to agriculture of  3.05 Rs/Kwhr,
 electricity costs rise to about 4,600 Rs/ha for 
paddy and sugar cane, reducing returns to 
land and management by 35.9 percent for rice 
and 23.8 percent for sugar cane
.  Likewise, total returns to land,
 labor and capital (value added) 
falls sharply for paddy and sugar cane irrigated by
 wells when the cost of electricity for pumping 
is included.  If electricity is costed at its 
economic price, total income generated from cotton 
cultivation (23,949 Rs/ha) is 53 percent greater than that for rice.33   3.49 Full cost of electricity for pumping woul
d thus reduce profitability per hectare of 
rice in favor of cotton, groundnuts and other l
ess water-intensive crops
 (for which costs and 
returns are not calculated here).
  This does not imply that all, or even most of the land planted 
to rice would shift to these crops.  For example, 
current cotton area irrigated with wells is only 
about 62 thousand hectares, compared with an estimated 202 thousand hectares of rice irrigated 
with wells, but cotton may not be suited to all 
the rice land, because of drainage and other soil 
characteristics.  Marketing problems might slow shifts to other crops, as well.  Nonetheless, 

charging full cost for electricity would seriously
 change the incentives for rice production, and 
                                                     
 31 Canal water charges are those for the Cauvery delta. 
32 For pumps, the economic cost of el
ectricity is assumed to be 3.1 Rs
/kw-hour.  For can
als, the economic 
cost of water is assumed to be 450 Rs/ha.  Note that
 these figures do not include the cost of capital of the 
pumps, however. 
33 Note that if the farmer hires outside labor or rents the land, farm income will be less than total value 
added. 
 35promote water conservation. Water thus saved w
ould be available for more productive uses either 
in agriculture, for household consumption, or industrial use. 
 36Table 
 
3.6:  Irrigation Costs by Crop and Type of Irrigation 
 Crop Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar
 Cotton Groundnut Bananas 
Form of Irrigation canal tank/well Well well well well well 
        
Crop duration (months) 4 4 4 11 6 4.5 10.5 
Water Use (mms/ha) 1350 1350 1350 1800 650 500 1800 
Months w/ irrigation 4 1 3 11 6 4.5 10.5 
Frequency of irrigation  1/6 days 1/3 days
 1/10 days 1/8 days 1/6 days 1/7 days 
Number of irrigations  5 40 33 22.5 22.5 45 
Hours/irrigation (for 1 ha)  14 10 12 8 10 10 
Total hours of irrigation/ha  70 400 396 180 225 450 
Energy consumption (kw-hrs/ha/season) --- 261 1,492 1,477 671 839 1,679 
Full Irrigation costs (Rs/ha) 450 809 4,625 4,579 2,081 2,602 5,203 
Actual canal/electricity charges (Rs/ha) 289 625 625 1,250 875 625 1,250 

Subsidy on irrigation (Rs/ha) 161 184 4,000 3,329 1,206 1,977 3,953 
       - 
Crops of all kinds / year 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 

Second crop paddy non-rice gnuts/ma
ize ------ pulses maize/other ------ 
        
Notes:        
Electricity cost (Rs/kwhr) 3.1       
Horsepower of pump 5       
Kilowatt/horsepower 0.746       
        
Tanks with wells: Tank water used for 3 months; well water for 1 month.      
Canal irrigation fees: Land revenue: 1-2 Rs/acre (2.5-5.0 Rs/ha); 
rice water charge to irrigati
on dept: 15 Rs/acre (37.5 Rs/ha)
;   
  2 cesses (500 + 100%) of (land tax plus rice water 
charge); total = Rs 280 to 297.5 / hectare.    
Source: AgroStat 2001; K. Palinasami, TNAU Water Resource Center.         
 37 3.50 Fertilizer is also subsidized: farmer prices of urea, di-ammonium phosphate (DAP) and 
potash (K20) are 33, 5 and 48 percent below estimated border prices, respectively.
34  These 
subsidies significantly affect profitability: estimated
 fertilizer subsidies per hectare range are 810 
to 914 Rs/hectare for paddy and 2408 Rs/hectare for s
ugar cane (Table 3.8), equivalent to 6.6 to 
9.3 percent of net financial returns for paddy a
nd 13.4 percent of net fina
ncial returns for sugar 
cane. 3.51 Total input subsidies (both irrigation and f
ertilizer) thus account for 32.0 percent of 
net financial returns (calculated with a flat rate
 cost of electricity/irrigation) of sugar cane 
and 39.2 percent of net financial returns to paddy under well irrigation.
  The share of total input subsidy for other crops is much smaller: (9
.5 to 15.2 percent).  Net returns for cotton and 
groundnuts at economic prices of fertilizer and 
water are about 13,600 Rs/hectare, 1.9 times higher than those of paddy cultivated with well i
rrigation and 1.27 times higher than sugar cane. 
3.52 Current charges for irrigation (electricity co
sts) for paddy cultivated with tubewells 
in Tamil Nadu (Rs 625/ha) are less than irrigatio
n costs per hectare of paddy cultivated in 
other major rice producing states in India (Figure 3.4).
  These electricity costs are only two-
thirds average irrigation costs in Andhra Pradesh and 45 percent of irrigation costs in Punjab.  If 
full costs of irrigation were charged for tubewells, in Tamil Nadu (Rs 4,625/ha) , however, these 
costs would be 2.3 and 3.4 times the irrigation cost
s per hectare of paddy cultivated in Punjab and 
Haryana, respectively.   
3.53 Comparisons of gross profits per hectare of rice cultivation between Tamil Nadu 
and other states nonetheless suggest that there 
is ample scope for a moderate increase in 
electricity charges.
  Gross profits per hectare of rice cu
ltivation using C1 costs (i.e. returns to 
land and management) for Tamil Nadu (well irri
gation) are 5.3 percent higher than the AP 
average.  Charging a flat rate cost for electri
city/pump makes returns for TN/wells essentially 
equal to average returns for AP (12,261 vs 12,242 Rs/ha).  Charging full irrigation/electricity 
costs for TN/wells reduces returns to 8260 Rs/ha, comparable to West Bengal (8,279 Rs/ha).
35                                                      
 34 Border prices of fertilizer are calculated using 
the 2010 World Bank Commodity forecasts for world 
prices (expressed in 2002 prices) and the December 
2002 nominal exchange rate.  Freight and marketing 
costs are from Gulati and Narayanan (2003, Table A3.2).   
35 Yields in Tamil Nadu are below those of AP and Punjab (4.0-4.1 tons/ha versus 4.8 and 5.1 tons/ha), but 
average output price in Tamil Nadu is 
higher than AP (5.9 vs 5.5 Rs/kg) and especially Punjab (4.8 Rs/kg).  
Varietal differences account for some 
of the price difference.  Note that measures of financial returns are 
greatly influenced by output prices and yields which may vary from year to year. 
 38 Table 
 
3.7:  Financial and Economic Returns by Crop and Type of Irrigation 
  Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar CaneCotton Groundnuts 
 Canal Tank-well Well Well Well Well 
  (Madurai)(Tirunaveli)(Vellore
)(Madurai) (Madurai) (Coimbatore)
       
Area (thousand hectares, 1999-2000) 1,411 403 202 316 62 265 
Water Use (mms/ha) 1,350 1,350 1,350 1,800 650 500 

Total Water Use (ha-cms) 190,512 54,432 27,216 56,880 4,030 13,250 
       

Flat Rate Electricity/Water Charges (Rs/ha) 289 914 625 1,250 875 625 
Meter Electricity Charge (current rate, Rs/ha)            -    341 298 295 134 168 
Economic Cost Electricity/Water 
(Rs/ha) 450 1,259 4,625 4,579 2,081 2,602 
Average Economic Cost Water 
(Rs/cm) 3.3 9.3 34.3 25.4 32 52 
       
Financial Returns (flat rate, Rs
/ha) 11,113 9,849 12,261 17,956 16,180 16,827 
Financial Returns (w/ electricity 
meter, Rs/ha)           -    10,422 12,587 18,911 16,921 17,285 
Financial Returns (econ cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 10,952 9,504 8,260 14,627 14,974 14,851 
Economic Returns (econ cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 10,056 8,589 7,451 10,723 13,648 13,619 
       
Flat rate irrig cost/Fin return (no irrig 
charge) 2.50% 8.50% 4.90% 6.50% 5.10% 3.60% 
Meter elect cost/Fin return (no irrig 
charge)  3.20% 2.30% 1.50% 0.80% 1.00% 
Economic cost irrig/Fin return (no irrig 
charge) 3.90% 11.70% 35.90% 23.80% 12.20% 14.90% 
       
Value Added (flat rate cost irrig,
 Rs/ha) 18,574 17,357 19,665 31,097 25,155 25,802 
Value Added (econ cost irrig, 
Rs/ha) 18,412 17,012 15,664 27,768 23,949 23,826 
VA (flat rate cost irrig)/water us
e (Rs/mm) 13.76 12.86 
14.57 17.28 38.7 51.6 
VA (econ cost irrig)/water use 
(Rs/mm) 13.64 12.6 11.6 15.43 36.84 47.65 
Labor VA 7,461 7,508 7,404 13,141 8,975 8,975 
       
Source: TNAU Crop Survey cost of production and yield 
data for 1999/2000 and 2000/01;
 TN Water CGE model.  
       
Notes:       
Flat rate for electricity denotes charge for 5 h.p. pump set; 
flat rate for water denotes wate
r charges and other taxes for can
als.   Economic cost of electricity and water 
include only operating and maintenance co
sts, not full depreciation of capital. 
Average economic costs of water calculated as water use (mms
/ha) divided by economic cost electricity/water (Rs/ha). 
Average economic costs of water are low in canals and ta
nks since much of water supplied by surface water.  
Economic returns figures include only temporary adjustment
s to output prices, and no adjustment to input prices. 
Add tank costs to flat rate.             
  39Table 
 
3.8:  Estimated Input Subsidies for Various Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2000-01 
  Paddy Paddy Paddy Sugar Cane Cotton Groundnuts 
 Canal Tank-well Well Well Well Well 
  (Madurai) (Tirunaveli) (Vellore
) (Madurai) (Madurai) (Coimbatore)
       
Irrigation charges 
(flat rate, Rs/ha) 
289 914 625 1,250 875 625 
Irrigation subsidy 
(relative to full 
cost, Rs/ha) 161 346 4,000 3,329 1,206 1,977 
Irrigation subsidy / 
financial returns 
(w/ flat rate) 1.50% 3.50% 32.60% 18.50% 7.50% 11.70% 
Fertilizer cost 
(Rs/ha) 2,597 2,651 2,347 6,981 2,673 1,688 
Fertilizer subsidy 

(Rs/ha) 1,148 1,172 1,038 3,904 1,326 1,232 
Fertilizer subsidy / 
financial returns 
(w/ flat rate) 10.30% 11.90% 8.50% 21.70% 8.20% 7.30% 
Total input subsidy 
/ financial returns 
(w/flat rate) 11.80% 15.40% 41.10% 40.30% 15.60% 19.10% 
Economic Returns 
(econ cost irrig, 
Rs/ha) 9,803 8,332 7,222 10,723 13,648 13,619 
Note:  Fertilizer subsidy calculation based on estimated nominal 
protection coefficient for urea, 
DAP and K20 estimated at 0.67
, 0.95 
and 0.52, respectively following Gulati and 
Narayanan (2003) and World Bank 2010 commod
ity price projections. Economic cost of 
electricity and water include only 
operating and maintenance costs, 
not full depreciation of capital. 
  Technology  3.54 The prevailing water scarcity in Tamil Nadu has provided impetus for the adoption 
of drip and sprinkler irrigation technology
. Today the state along with Maharashtra is one of 
the leading adopters of drip irrigation technology in India.  In 2002, 72,816 hectares in Tamil 
Nadu (slightly more than 1 percent of net sown
 area) was cultivated under drip and sprinkler 
irrigation (GoTN, Agriculture Policy Note, 2003-04).  These water-saving technologies are 
primarily used for horticultural, fruit and flow
er crops including Coconut, Grapes, Banana, 
Cashew, Citrus, Guava, Mango, Pomegranate, Sa
pota. The potential water savings from the use 
of drip irrigation as opposed to conventional well 
irrigation have been estimated to be large, 
ranging from 39 percent for tomatoes to as much as 68 percent for papaya  (Muthuchamy, 
Palanisami and Rajagoapl, 2000).  The government 
is also trying to promote the use of drip 
irrigation for sugar cane cultivated under private mills. 
 3.55 The cost of  a micro-irrigation system depends on the crop, spacing, water 
requirements and the distance from the water source
. The cost of installing drip irrigation is 
estimated to range from Rs 20,000 to Rs 25,000 
per hectare for wide spaced crops such as coconut and mangos to Rs 60,000 to 75,000 for cl
ose spaced crops such as sugarcane, cotton, 
vegetables etc.     The high capital cost of dr
ip irrigation poses a constraint to widespread 
 40adoption by marginal and small fa
rmers although the use of this technology has been encouraged 
though the provision of centrally funded subsidies to farmers. 
Environmental Management 
 3.56 An environmental action plan (EAP) has been drawn up with the aim of fully 
integrating environmental management in pl
anning, investment and management of the State's water resources
. A key element of the EAPs was 
to strengthen WRO's environmental 
monitoring and analysis capabilities via the creati
on of specialist Environmental Units/Cells. Two 
such units have been established in the main pl
anning departments (basin- and project-level). 
   Figure  3.4:  Irrigation Costs for Rice Cultivation in India (Rs 1999-2000/ha) 
-5001,000
1,500

2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500

4,000
4,500
5,000
TN WellsTNWells*A.Pradesh
HaryanaPunjab
W.Bengal
Irrigation Costs/ha * Indicates irrigation costs at economic price of electricity. 
  Figure  3.5:  Irrigation Costs and Gross Profits for Rice Cultivation in India 
-2,000
4,000
6,000

8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
TNcanals
TN tanksTN Wells
A.Pradesh
HaryanaPunjab
W.Bengal
Rupees (1999-2000) / haProfit (using C1 Costs)/ha
Irrigation Costs / ha
  414. Public Expenditures and Agricultural Extension Public Expenditures on Agriculture and Irrigation 
 4.1 Agriculture related public expenditures in
 Tamil Nadu (expenditures on agriculture 
and allied activities and irrigation) as a share of agricultural GSDP are higher than most 
major agricultural states in India (World Bank, 2003b)
. These expenditures (both capital and 
revenue) totaled Rs 17 Billion in 2002/03. Be
tween 1998-2000 agricultural expenditures have 
accounted for approximately 11 percent of to
tal Agricultural GSDP in Tamil Nadu; the 
comparable figure across Indian states was 7.8 percent.
36 In Tamil Nadu agriculture related 
capital expenditures are relatively low compared 
to the all-India average, although revenue 
expenditures as a share of Agricultural GSDP 
are significantly higher than most major 
agricultural states in India. This is a situation 
for concern since capital investments are important 
for future growth, furthermore a large share of 
revenue expenditures are incurred on staff salaries 
and the food and irrigation subsidies 
leaving operating expenses under funded. 
4.2 In 2002 capital expenditures on agriculture and allied activities and irrigation 
accounted for 4.3 percent and 13.5 percent of the total capital outlay of  Rs 22.1 billion in 

Tamil Nadu, respectively
.  Of a total revenue expenditure of Rs 268.62 billion approximately 5 
percent  (Rs 13.02 billion) was spent on agricultu
re and allied activities and 1.5 percent was spent 
on irrigation and flood control (Rs 3.96 billion)
. Total expenditures (capital and revenue 
expenditures) on agriculture and allied activities 
during the 1990s exhibited a slight downward 
trend with an average annual growth rate of Œ1.1 percent while total expenditures on irrigation 
have grown at an average annual rate of 6.2 percent (
Figure  4.1:). Gross capital formation in 
agriculture increased by 15 percent in during th
e 1990s and this growth was primarily due to 
private capital formation which grew by almost
 16 percent between 1989/90  and  1998/99.   
 Figure  4.1: Total Expenditures (Capital 
and Revenue) on Agriculture and Irrigation 
024681012141618201990-91
1991-92
1992-93
1993-94
1994-95
1995-96
1996-97
1997-98
1998-99
1999-00
2000-01
Year
Rs Billion (Constant 1993-94 Rs)
        Agriculture and Allied Activities  
Irrigation
 Source:  World Bank, Indian States Database 
                                                      
 36Agricultural public expenditures as a share of e
xpenditures on Economic Serv
ices and Agricultural 
GSDP are averages of data from 1998/99-2000/01. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  42Figure  4.2:  Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) in Agriculture 
02
46810121416
181989199019911992199319941995199619971998
Rs Billion (Constant 1993/94 Rupees)
Total Agricultural GFCF
Public GFCF
Private GFCF
      4.3 During the 1990s, the share of agricultura
l and allied expenditures devoted to crop 
husbandry has declined, while expenditures on
 animal husbandry, dairy development and 
agricultural research and education have increased
. In 2001 expenditures on crop husbandry 
represented the single largest category of e
xpenditures on agricultural and allied activities accounting for approximately 45 percent of expenditures (
Table  4.1).  Expenditures on animal 
husbandry, dairy development and agricultural resear
ch and education averaged  8.8 percent, 3.2 
percent and 7.1 percent of total expenditures on agriculture and allied activities, respectively. 
Real expenditures on crop husbandry have decrease
d by an average annual rate of 2.4 percent 
during the 1990s, while expenditures on dairy de
velopment, agricultural research and education 
and irrigation have increased by an average annual 
rate of 12 percent, 4.2 percent and 6 percent, 
respectively. 
 Table  4.1:  Breakdown of Expenditures on 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1997-2001) 
  1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 
Agriculture and Allied Activities (1993-94 Rs Billion) 9.711.014.29.39.1
Share of Expenditures (%)      
Agriculture (Crop Husbandry) 64.460.868.653.344.8
Soil and Water Conservation 2.83.42.63.85.7
Animal Husbandry 7.27.85.97.98.8
Dairy Development 0.61.01.33.03.2
Fisheries 2.12.41.52.12.7
Forestry and Wild Life 8.610.98.413.513.3
Plantations 0.00.00.00.00.0
Food Storage and Warehousing 0.10.10.00.00.0
Agriculture and Research Education 5.85.25.77.87.1
Co-operation 7.27.05.011.016.9
Other Agricultural services 2.62.01.52.42.4
       Source: Authors™ calculation using data
 from  GoTN, Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal, 1999-2000, Chapter 3, p. 23  
Source:  World Bank, India -States Database 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  43Tamil Nadu™s Public Distribution System  4.4 Tamil Nadu™s Targeted Public Distribution Sy
stem (TPDS) is one the  central pillars of the state™s strategy to ensure food security
.  Under the TPDS, eligible households can purchase 
a specified amount of  food grains and other essential commodities at subsidized prices from a 
network of public distribution outlets, known as Fa
ir Price shops, throughout the state.  Of the 18 
GoI essential commodities, four commodities na
mely, rice, wheat, sugar and kerosene are 
supplied through the public distribution system (PDS) in TN.  Ooty tea and Iodised salt are also 

sold through the PDS in the state. Beginning in July 2002, TN introduced some significant 
reforms to its PDS to address fiscal concerns 
the main elements of which included a coupon 
system to eliminate leakages, decentralized procur
ement, and restructuring of the issue price of 
rice.   4.5 Although substantive PDS reforms were undert
aken between 2002 to 2003, these reforms 
have recently suffered a setback. Rice coupons 
introduced to reduce the number of households 
eligible for PDS rice have been abolished by th
e GoTN after the national election in April-May 
2004. Income criteria to determine PDS e
ligibility have also been withdrawn. 
4.6 Coverage of TPDS in Tamil Nadu has been significantly higher than in the majority of 
Indian states.  In 1999/00 85 percent of BPL house
holds in Tamil Nadu were estimated to use the 
TPDS, a 14% increase since 1993/94.  The propor
tion of APL households accessing TPDS is also 
high in Tamil Nadu with approximately 66%
 of APL households accessing TPDS shops in 
1999/00 (Deininger, Umali-Deininger and Tritah, 2003). 

4.7 Under the TPDS system operating in TN (t
hrough August 2003), households had the option 
of  drawing rice from the PDS or additional quantitie
s of sugar or kerosene in lieu of rice.  Based 
on the family™s choice, a different colored 
family card is issued.  As of March 2003, 
approximately 16 million family cards had been i
ssued in the state of which 84.7 percent were 
rice cards (pink cards), 8.1 percent were kerosen
e cards (yellow cards), 7 percent were sugar 
cards (yellow cards) and 0.2 percent were kero
sene cards issued to police (khaki cards). 
Approximately 4.6 percent of households in the 
state qualified under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
(AAY), a scheme sponsored by the Government of India which targets the poorest households in 
the state enabling them to draw food grains at 
a specially subsidized ra
te specified by GoI. 
4.8 As part of its reform efforts the GoTN ha
d attempted to reduce the number of bogus cards 
that had come into circulation in the state by introducing a coupon system for drawing rice from 

the PDS. Twelve million rice card holders were 
issued coupons. Coupons were only issued to the 
person whose photograph has been affixed to th
e family card. The coupon as well as the family 
card were needed to withdraw rice.   
4.9 Each rice cardholder was entitled to draw 
a specified quantity from the PDS system depending on their family size
.  The maximum monthly issue amount was 20 Kgs for a family 
with ﬁ3 or more unitsﬂ. 37 Families that opted for a yellow card were eligible for an additional 3 
Kgs of sugar or 5 litres of kerosene per month in lieu 
of rice.  In the Nilgiris district, card holders were entitled to an additional 4 Kgs of rice per 
month in addition to the normal entitlement.  All 
AAY households were eligible to draw 35Kgs of rice per month irrespective of family size.   
4.10 Family cardholders in the city and district headquarters could draw 10 Kg of wheat and 
those in rural areas could draw 5Kg each month 
in addition to the rice entitlement.  Each family 
cardholder was also eligible to receive 500 gram
s per head up to a maximum of 2 Kgs per card 
per month.  Those who opted for yellow cards we
re entitled to an additional 3 Kg of sugar per 
                                                     
 37 An adult counts  for 1 unit while a child is counted as ½ an unit.   
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  44month in addition to their regular entitlement. Ke
rosene was supplied to cardholders on the basis 
of the number of LPG connections they had and wa
s also supplied to some public institutions and 
hospitals through the PDS system.   
4.11 Food grains in the public distribution system are sold to the public through a network of 
Fair price shops that are run by the TN Civil S
upplies Corporation. Private traders are not allowed 
to operate these shops. Each revenue village has a 
fair price shop and the government™s policy is 
to try to ensure that no card holder should  have
 to walk more than 2 km to reach a fair price 
shop.  There is an additional stipulation that th
e maximum number of cards attached to a shop 
should not exceed 800 in urban areas and 500 in rural 
areas.  In very remote areas, or areas where 
the existing fair price shops has to serve more 
than the maximum stipulated number of family 
cards, women™s groups are allowed to distribute PDS commodities. 
4.12 The PDS rice requirement is met through allotm
ents made by the GoI (allotment from the 
Central Pool) and paddy procurement within th
e state. In October 2002 the state adopted a 
decentralized procurement system under whic
h the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation 
procures rice on behalf of FCI at the Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the GoI.  TNCSC 
procures paddy by opening Direct Purchase Centr
es in the Cauvery Delta Area and through taluk 
godowns in other areas, on behalf of the GoI. The pa
ddy that is procured is  converted into rice by 
the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation, stored 
in its godowns and issued in the PDS outlets.  
TNCSC adheres to the  quality norms of FCI a
nd the paddy procured by the state may be re-
allotted to the state as part of the GoI allotment to the state.  The difference between the central 
issue price and the economic cost of rice (set by 
GoI) is reimbursed to the state for the central 
pool allocation of rice. If the quantity procured falls short of the allocation from the central pool 

the balance will be allocated from the central pool 
and if the quantity procured is in excess of the 
requirement for the PDS it will be taken over to the central pool. 
4.13 In 2002/03 the GoI allocation to the state was 495 thousand tons per month.  The 
allocation varies by month and the allocation from th
e central pool is more than adequate to meet 
the requirement of rice under the PDS .  The ce
ntral issue price of rice under TPDS is Rs. 5.65 
per kg of BPL rice and Rs. 8.30 per kg for  APL rice.  The GOI also allows states to charge an 
additional 50 paise per kg to cover costs of trans
portation, storage cost etc.  The economic price 
of rice  obtained by the TN CSC is approximately Rs 12 per kg. As of October 1, 2002 the state 
has adopted a two tier-pricing system for issuing rice whereby the first 10 kgs of rice is sold for 
Rs 3.50 per kg,  any amount above 10 kg is sold for Rs 6 per kg.  The PDS issue price of rice for 

AAY families is Rs 3 per kg.   4.14 Sugar required for the PDS is met out of the 
allotment of levy sugar by the GoI and by 
purchases of non-levy sugar from Tamil Nadu Co-ope
rative Sugar Federation.  For Kerosene the 
state is restricted to the allocation made by th
e GoI.  GoI supplies APL wheat to Tamil Nadu at 
Rs 6.10 per kg.  As of July 2002, TN has been
 selling this wheat though its PDS system at Rs 
7.50 per kg.  The retail price of sugar issued through the PDS was  Rs 13.50 per kg.  If the state 
has to procure non-levy sugar to meet requirements,
 the state government has to bear the costs.  
The issue price of kerosene was Rs 8.40-Rs 9 pe
r litre.  GoI recommends that the issue price 
under the PDS should be between Rs 9-Rs 9.60. 
 The difference in cost is met by the GoTN. 
4.15 As a result of the reforms of the pub
lic procurement system, the GOTN had 
estimated that the food subsidy would be 
dramatically reduced from Rs.1500 crore in 
2001/02 to projected Rs.700 crore in 2003/04, a reduction of Rs. 800 crore
.  Cessation of local 
procurement (except on behalf of the FCI) reduced government expenditures on procurement by 
eliminating the costs of the extra procurement in
centives paid and the costs of milling the paddy 
into rice.  State procurement of paddy in 
2000/01 and 2001/02 were 2.
61 and 1.24 million tons, 
respectively, (equivalent to 1.75 and 0.83 million t
ons of rice).  For this procurement the paid 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  45incentives and ﬁincidental chargesﬂ of Rs. 350 to 
400 per ton (a bonus of about 7.2 percent of the 
GOI procurement price of fine rice).  In total, these costs were approximately Rs 101 crore in 
2000/01 and Rs 50 crore in 2001/02 (Table 4.2).  
4.16 The bulk of the savings on food subsidies, however, were achieved through 
reduction in number of cards (and ultimately the sales of rice), and in the subsidy per 
kilogram of rice sold
.  Total ration sales dropped from 2.10 million tons in 2000/01 to 1.62 
million tons in 2002/03.   In addition the unit s
ubsidy paid by the GOTN fell by 64 percent from 
Rs. 5.13 /kg to Rs/ 1.85 as the average sales price 
rose from Rs 3.0/kg to an
 estimated Rs 4.07/kg, 
and the average cost of rice from the GOI fell 
from Rs 8.13/kg to Rs. 5.92/kg.  (This reduction in 
the average cost was due to an increase in the a
llocation of BPL rice and a lowering of the cost of APL rice.)  Thus, the    reduction in the subsidy 
due to reforms in distribution was about Rs 7.79 
billion (Rs 779 crore).  The total estimated reduction in subsidy (combined 
effect of reforms on 
procurement and distribution) was thus about 
Rs. 8.80 billion (Rs 880 crore), (Table 4.3). 
4.17 Effective 1 September 2003, the two-tiered pricing of rice according to the amount of 
ration purchased was scheduled to e
nd, with the entire ration to be so
ld at Rs. 3.5/kg.  As a result, 
if the quantity sold through ration shops remains at an average of 135 thousand tons per month, 
revenues will fall (and the subsidy will incr
ease) by Rs 0.93 billion (Rs 93 crore or about $21 
million), equivalent to 11 percent of the total s
ubsidy reduction of Rs. 8.
80 billion, shown above.  
If quantity of rice sold per card rises to 16 kgs/
card, the increase in costs relative to 2002/03 
would be Rs. 3.74 crore (about $84 million). The 
implications of the most recent policy reforms 
following the national election in April-Ma
y 2004 remain to be examined.   
Agricultural Extension  4.18 The agricultural extension system in TN is still organized around a modified 
Training and Visitation (T&V) extension approac
h, but with reduced levels of in-service 
training and fewer farmer visits
.  It is important to note that T&V Extension projects only 
strengthened the Department of Agriculture™s 
(DOA) extension system; extension programs in 
the other line departments, including Horticu
lture (DOH), Animal Husbandry (DAH), Fisheries 
(DOF), etc., were not improved.  Therefore, 
Tamil Nadu™s basic, multip
le agency extension 
structure remaining largely intact since the introduction of T&V Extension in the 1980s.  In short, 
each line department is still responsible for its
 own extension staff and programs, with little 
coordination at any level.  Also, since state government funding primarily goes for salaries and 
personal emoluments, most extension activities 
across all line departments are funded through 
ﬁtop-downﬂ central government schemes, plus ot
her subsidy and incentive programs that the 
extension field staff are expected to implement. 

 
4.19 New agricultural development priorities in Tamil Nadu are likely to bring about 
changes in the extension system
.  The GOTN has recognized the income generating and value-
added possibilities of the horticulture, sericulture, 
livestock and fisheries sectors.  In the Tenth 
Plan period there is an emphasis on horticultu
ral development, including agro-processing and 
marketing.  For example, the districts of Dhar
mapuri (Hussur), Nilgiri (Ooty) and Madurai have 
been earmarked for mango development, both fo
r processing and export.  The Agriculture and 
Processed Foods Export Development Authority (APEDA) is assisting the state in this venture.  
In addition, the GOTN plans to strengthen research
 and extension for the development of other horticultural crops, including fruit, 
vegetable and floriculture crops, plus cashews and medicinal 
plants.  This program is expected to focus on the organization and management of new supply 

chains, including domestic and export market de
velopment and investigating the feasibility of 
different types of value-added processing.  Since the GOTN has very limited extension capacity 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  46for horticulture development, it plans to li
nk agricultural, horticulture and agricultural 
engineering extension systems/units.  
 Table  4.2:  Estimates of th
e Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Costs of Rice Procurement  
 GOIGOTN IncentiveGOTN
Year and Rice Season QuantityProc. Price
aIncentive
b (% of Proc.Subsidy
 (th. Tons)(Rs/ton)(Rs/ton) Price)(mn Rs)
  2000 Samba (23/12/99 to 20/03/00)
c     1,085             5,200  470 9.0%             510  
      

2000 Samba (21/3/00 to 30/6/00)          82      
       5,200  350 6.7%               29  
      
2000 Kuruvai (1/9/00 to 15/12/00)        550             5,400  350 6.5%             193  

      
2001 Samba (16/12/00 to 1/9/01)     1,974             5,400  400 7.4%             790  

      

2001 Kuruvai (15/10/01 to 15/12/01)        223             5,600  400 7.1%               89  

      

2002 Samba (1/1/02 to 11/4/02)     1,019       
      5,600  400 7.1%             408  
      

      

FY 2000-01 (est.)     2,606             5,400  388 7.2%          1,011  

      

FY 2001-02 (est.)     1,242             5,600  400 7.1%             497  

      
Note:  Samba and kuruvai denote the two rice crop seasons 
in the Cauvery delta region of Tamil Nadu.  
a Fine or super fine quality.  
b Incentives include "incidental charges" paid to sellers of paddy. 
c Assumes 80 
percent of procurement in Cauvery delta areas with 500 Rs/ton incentive and 20 percent of procurement in 
non-delata areas with 350 Rs/ton incidental charge. Procurement in this period was monopoly procurement; 
thereafter, all procurement was parallel (non-monopoly) procurement.  
Source:  Government of Tamil Nadu 2002.  Cooperation, Food and Consumer Protection Department, 
Policy Note 2002-03 (Demand No. 12).
   47Table  4.3:  Estimates of the Impact of Policy Reforms on GOTN Fiscal Costs of Rice Distribution 
Year   2000/012000/012000/012000/01
Channel / Source of Rice  BPLAPLGOTNTotal
   
  (1) Number of cards million    13.5

  (2) Distribution '000 tons        1,131             79           890         2,100  
  (3) Unit cost of rice to GOTN
a Rs/kg 5.6511.3011.008.13
  (4) Estimated cost of procurement to GOTN, (2)*(3) bn Rs 6.390.899.7917.07
  (5) Sales price Rs/kg 3.003.003.003.00
  (6) Estimated average sales revenues, (2)*(5) bn Rs 3.390.242.676.30
  (7) Estimated GOTN subsidy, (4)-(6) bn Rs 3.000.667.1210.77

       
Year   2002/032002/032002/032002/03

Channel / Source of Rice  BPLAPLGOTNTotal

       

  (8) Number of cards million    10.4
  (9) Distribution
b,c '000 tons        1,458            162             -           1,620  
  (10) Unit cost of rice to GOTN
a Rs/kg          5.65           8.30             -            5.92  
  (11) Estimated cost of procurement to GOTN, (9)*(10)
 bn Rs          8.24           1.34             -            9.58  
  (12) Sales price
d  Rs/kg          4.07           4.07             -            4.07  
  (13) Estimated average sales revenues, (9)*(12) bn Rs          5.94
           0.66             -            6.60  
  (14) Estimated GOTN subsidy, (11)-(13) bn Rs          2.30   
        0.68             -            2.98  
       
  (15) Change in GOTN subsidy, (14)-(7) bn Rs         (0.70)          0.03         (7.12)        (7.79) 
(a) Central issue prices from FCI for BPL and APL; Estimated figure of GOTN procurement from GOTN, Dept. of Civil Supplies. 
(b) Assumes 90 percent of rice procured at BPL price; 10 percent at APL price (figures from GOTN, Department of Civil Supplies.
 (c) Assumes 135 thousand tons/month for 12 months (approx. monthly distribution in mid- 2003). 
(d) Assumes that all ration card holders purchase at least 10 kg
s/month with average ration purchase calculated as distribution
 divided   
by number of cards = 12.98 kgs.  Average sales price = [ (10kgs @ 3.5/Rs/kg) + (2.98 kgs) @ 6.0 Rs/kg) ] / 12.98.
   48 4.20 Increasing public-private partnerships and pr
ivate sector involvement in extension 
is an encouraging development in the state.
  Public-private partnerships are also planned as 
industrial houses cooperate with extension by 
focusing on agricultural export and value-added 
processing opportunities.  For example, the New 
Anna Marumalarchi Thittam is focusing on 
small scale agro-industries.  Some industries bei
ng considered include edible oil extraction, paddy 
hulling, cashew processing, extraction of coconut oil, ice cream making, etc.  To date, no 
sustained expansion in the marketing of horticultural crops has taken place because extension has 
not been reorganized, strengthened and given a ne
w mandate for organizing farmer organizations 
that can systematically supply these planned new 
value chains.  If the ATMA model  (see Box 
4.1) could be introduced into Tamil Nadu, a more
 coordinated and systematic extension program 
could be organized at the district and bl
ock level to develop 
production and marketing 
arrangements for high-value commodities and to 
organized value-added processing enterprises.  
4.21 The state could also draw on a variety of 
international experiences with transforming 
extension systems into more client responsive ser
vices.  For example, Chile introduced a system 
of contracting private service providers in 1978, 
involving farmer organizations that propose 
defined projects for commercialization and mode
rnization of small-farm agriculture at a 
decentralized level.  In Keny
a, the Agricultural Technology and Information Response Initiative 
implemented by the Kenyan Agricultural Research
 Institute since 2000, provides grants averaging 
$3000 to farmers organizations or community-bas
ed organizations to finance acquisition of technologies, exchange visits to other farmers, and visits by institu
te staff.  Similarly, Bangladesh 
provided funding ($1,500 per year) to 
upazilas (sub-districts) to promote collaboration between 
public and private agencies through an average of
 four to five small-scale projects in each sub-
district (World Bank, 2004b).   
4.22 One innovative public-private sector initiative involves the disseminating of 
extension information to farmers through th
e use of internet kiosks in rural areas
.  The 
system allows farmers to obtain up-to-date 
information on major crop prices, advances in 
production technologies, as well as other information on various social services including schools 
and health facilities. Through these kiosks, called Pa
rry™s Corners, farmers can also send their 
queries regarding agricultural problems faced in th
e field to extension workers in the Department of Agriculture and researchers at the Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University.  The kiosk attendant 
owns a digital camera that can be used to photogr
aph crop damage, pests inf
estations etc.  These photographs can then be transmitted to researcher
s and extension workers for diagnosis. This 
strategy has been successful in prompting ear
ly responses to several outbreaks of plant and 
animal diseases.  
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  49 Text Box  4.1:  The ATMA Approach to Extension 
 Several states in India have m
oved away from the T&V approach to
 a more decentralized extension 
approach that integrates extension programs across the major line departments, and introduces 
participatory, bottom-up planning procedures, resulting the creation of a more responsive, transparent 
and accountable extension system. In the mid-1990s the Government of India and the World Bank 

undertook a systematic assessment of the post-T&V Extension situation and then carried out a pilot 
project under the Innovations in Technology Dissemination (ITD) component of the National 
Agricultural Technology Project (NATP).  This proj
ect, which was launched in 1998, was designed to 
field-test a new extension model that focused 
on improving farm income through agricultural 
diversification.  The new model involved decentrali
zed, restructured and reoriented extension activities 
at the district and block levels through a new institution called the Agricultural Technology 
Management Agency, or ATMA.  (In Hindi, ATMA 
means ﬁsoul;ﬂ therefore, this new institution was 
to become the 
soul of agricultural development
 within each district.)  This ATMA approach has now 
been pilot tested in 28 project districts across 7 st
ates.  As a result of the successes achieved, in 2002 
the Government of India (GOI) adopted a new 
Policy Framework for Agricultural Extension
 that 
endorsed this new integrated approach. 

 
The new extension system promoted through the 
ATMA model places more 
emphasis on agricultural 
diversification and improving rural incomes.  The GOI™s new extension policy reflects the current 

agricultural development situation in India.  First, there is recognition that the country has achieved 

food security; therefore,
 extension priorities need to shift towards agricultural diversification and 
improving rural household income.  Second, this new 
policy recognizes that a) the private sector is 
assuming more responsibility for extension activities related to the major food and commercial crops; 
b) most productivity gains associated with high yielding varieties have already been exploited, 
therefore, further investments in DOA extension w
ill result in minimal returns on investment; and c) 
hunger in India today is essentially a poverty problem, therefore, further investments in field crop 
extension will do little to alleviate rural poverty and hunger. 
 
Given the successes achieved through the ATMA model, the GOI now recognizes that there is 
considerable scope to increase rural household income and reduce rural poverty by focusing on high 
value crop and livestock enterprises, including value-added processing.  This new policy agenda 

reflects a shift in focus from extension promoting field crop technology (i.e. supply driven), to a new 
focus on market driven opportunities for high value commodities.  In addition, many project districts 
have been successful in building ﬁsocial capitalﬂ by organizing and mobilizing rural women and 

unemployed young farmers to undertake these high value commodities and enterprises.  
 The combination of new goals, a decentralized approa
ch and a new integrated structure has created new 
enthusiasm for a public extension system that is more responsive to rural people and capable of 
increasing rural household income.  In addition, th
e ATMA framework provides mechanisms for cost 
recovery and strengthening research-extension linkages.  The combination of Block Technology Teams 
(BTTs), Farmer Interest Groups (FIGs) and Farmer
 Associations (FAs) is also a more effective 
approach in disseminating information on specific high value commodities and/or enterprises. , making 

it possible to to reduce the long-term cost of extension by phasing out village extension workers 
through attrition. 
  505. Agricultural Markets and Market Policies  5.1 Development of agricultural markets will be 
essential for agricultural diversification 
and accelerated farmer income growth
.  Significant reforms in markets have taken place in 
recent years, giving a larger role to the priv
ate sector and removing movement restrictions. 
Promising institutional developments in marketing in
clude an expansion of contract farming, long 
established for sugar cane, which has begun on 
a small scale through private sector initiatives in 
cotton, gherkins (cucumbers), poultry and rice.   
5.2 As in most states of India, the public sector has historically played a major role in 
Tamil Nadu™s agricultural markets.  The initiatives of the government focused on framing rules 
and regulations to ensure fair trade practices, 
establishing institutional markets, building storage 
and warehousing facilities, creating institutions fo
r standardization and grading, and building 
awareness among farmers regarding the public ma
rketing infrastructure that was provided. 
5.3 Government intervention in markets 
involved three major channels: direct 
procurement and sales, regulated markets, and cooperatives.
  In Tamil Nadu, the government 
intervened directly in paddy, rice, sugar and cotton markets through 
direct procurement and 
sales.  It also placed restrictions on private trade, and set up 
regulated markets
 to facilitate 
transactions between farmers and licensed traders
, in order to provide fair prices for farmers 
and ensure fair trading practices.  Restricti
ons on movements of commodities were designed to 
prevent sales to importing regions from causi
ng shortages in exporting regions.  Licensing 
requirements helped the government monitor tr
aders and limit their scales of operation.  
Cooperatives were actively encouraged and had si
gnificant roles in milk markets.  
Private trade in unregulated markets
 operated only on a small scale, mainly at the village level, yet accounted 
for the large majority of sales of most crops other than paddy and sugar cane . 
5.4 Significant reforms have taken place in the 1990s in Tamil Nadu, increasing the role 
of the private sector in general.  
The scale of direct procurement of paddy has been reduced 
(and the GOTN no longer procures paddy on its
 own account), though regulated markets and 
cooperative sectors continue.  More recently, 
the GOTN has actively encouraged private 
marketing through lifting of stock and movement 
restrictions for rice, waiving of the cess on 
cotton sales, promotion of contract farming,
 and planned investments in rural market 
infrastructure.  Market Structure: Regulated and Private Markets 
 5.5 Tamil Nadu has 270 regulated markets
 and 15 sub-markets, located at major assembling 
centers, managed by 16 market committees at district level.
  At the top of the organizational 
structure is the state-level 
Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Marketing Board, 
an autonomous 
and advisory body that helps the market comm
ittees to organize and implement development 
activities, and plans for improvements in marketing of
 agricultural produce in the state. It is also 
responsible for development of infrastructural facilities at market committee level, enabling 
publicity and propaganda activities of the regulated
 markets,  and training the market committee 
personnel.  5.6 Market committees
 are headed by a chairman who is
 selected from among the members. 
The market committees collect ce
ss for the marketed agricultu
ral produce in their respective defined operational areas. Market cess for the sale 
of notified commodities, whether sold within 
the premises of regulated markets or outside, we
re increased from 0.45 per cent to one per cent 
during the last decade. Selling notified commodities 
within the premises of regulated market is 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  51purely voluntary. Tax assessments on sales outside
 of regulated markets are based on sales 
declarations of traders to tax collectors. Traders who pay the cess on their sales outside of 
regulated markets receive no direct benefit from the 
regulated markets.  For these traders, the cess 
functions as a general sales tax. 5.7 The regulated markets have been provided with infrastructural facilities like godowns, 
commercial grading centres and drying yards. We
lfare schemes to encourage farmers to bring 
their produce to regulated markets such as pl
edge loans and Tamil Nadu Farmers Development 
Welfare Scheme are also operated.  
5.8 Overall, regulated markets account for only about 10 percent of the total value of 
sales of all foodgrains. For the  major crops  with significan
t sales in regulated markets (paddy, 
maize, ragi, green and black gram, groundnuts,
 sesame, turmeric and cotton) these markets 
account for only 15 percent of the value of production.)
 (Table  5.1).
  There are large variations 
across region and by commodity, however, with re
gulated markets in Cuddalore, Villupuram and 
Thiruvannamalai districts (northeast zone) having high volumes of transactions and markets in 
Madurai, Ramanathapuram and Tirunelveli districts (southern zone) with relatively few transactions.  Surveys by the Department of 
Agricultural Economics, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University indicate that farmers are aware of th
e regulated market, but that small and marginal 
farmers with very small marketable surplus tend 
to sell their produce to village traders.   
5.9 Regulated markets account for a higher percentage of sales of turmeric (42 percent), 
sesame (55 percent).
  Market committees for turmeric in Erode and Trichy districts (western 
zone and Cauvery delta) have been particularly
 successful in spurring production, sales and 
exports.   5.9 Marketing through Primary Co-operative 
Marketing Societies (PCMS) account for 
an even smaller share of trade (Table 5.2).  
Through the PCMS at the local (taluk) level, the 
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Marketing Federation 
(TANFED) procures cotton, paddy, chilly, 
sunflower seeds, coriander, blackgram and other cr
ops.  It thus acts as an agent of the National 
Agricultural Marketing Federation of India (
NAFED) to provide price support and promote 
exports.  The PCMS also assists member farmers in processing, storing and marketing their 
agricultural produce, in some instances providing
 credit, arranging auction sales, or directly 
purchasing agricultural produce.  The total value of the produce marketed through the 
cooperatives has increased over time (Table  5.3) mainly due to marketing of cotton and 
sugarcane.   5.10 In 1999, the Tamil Nadu Government established Farmers Markets (
Uzhavar 
Sandhai) for fruits and vegetables to reduce marketing costs between growers and 
consumers.
  At present nearly 100 Farmers Markets are 
functioning in the state, in parallel with other marketing channels.   
5.10 Small village markets (shandies) provide
 markets for sales and purchases of 
agricultural commodities, as well as agricultural inputs consumer goods.  On an average, 
each shandy caters to a geographical area of a
bout 15 square kilometers. and a population of 
about 30,000 spread over about 25 villages.  The total volume of marketable surplus of 
agricultural commodities passing through the periodi
c markets in India is somewhere between six 
and twenty per cent of the surplus. 

 Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  52 Table  5.1:  Marketed Surplus and Market Ch
annels of Major Crops in Tamil Nadu, 2001-02 
 Production 
Marketed 
Surplus Production Sales     Regulated Markets
  th tons percent mn Rs mn Rsth tons percent 
       
Paddy 
6,584
73%49,91836,685786 16%
Maize 118
100%55155158 49%
Cholam (sorghum) 
275
87%1,3171,142
n.a. n.a.Cumbu (pearl millet) 
153
90%681614
n.a. n.a.Ragi (finger millet) 
235
83%1,0548787 3%
Red gram 
41100%529529
n.a. n.a.Green gram 
53100%9839839 16%
Black gram 
104
94%1,8201,71615 15%
Sugarcane 
37,249
89%28,45325,323
 Groundnut 
1,250
98%15,87315,54359 5%
Sesame 
4698%75373825 55%
Chilly 
4289%1,024914
n.a. n.a.Coriander 
7100%158158
n.a. n.a.Turmeric 
118
100%1,8141,81350 42%
Cotton 
230
100%3,5603,56068 30%
Tomato 
258
100%720720
n.a. n.a.Onion 
279
82%1,009832
n.a. n.a.     
 Total 
  84%110,21892,6991,076 10%
Note: Value of sugar cane is calculated using the price of jaggery, assuming an 8 percent extraction rate. 
Source: Share of marketed surplus from the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops Scheme, Department of 

Agricultural Economics, TNAU. Farmgate prices from Season and Crop Report, 2000-01, Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics.
  Rice Markets 
 5.11 For three decades, from the early 1960s to
 the early 1990s, the state government 
controlled the majority of paddy trade, procur
ing paddy for the public distribution system.  
In the early 1960s, the state procured five bags 
of paddy (65 kgs each) per hectare, for all the 
farms having about one hectare under paddy. Later, 
this was restricted to the Cauvery Delta zone 
(zone IV) under the monopoly procurement scheme, 
by which the entire marketable surplus of 
paddy in the region was to be sold only to the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation.  
5.12 In 1993-94, a system of parallel procurement was introduced for paddy which 
continues to date.  
 Under the system of parallel procurem
ent, farmers have the option to sell 
their marketable surplus of paddy either to 
the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation at 
procurement prices or to private traders at market prices. Since October 2002, the state 
government has not procured rice on its own beha
lf, but instead the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies 
Corporation procures rice on behalf of the F
ood Corporation of India at the Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) fixed by the GoI.  Unlike in most other states of India, neither the Food Corporation 

of India nor the state government procures rice through a levy on rice mills.   
 53 Table  5.2: Estimated Net Trade in Rice for Tamil Nadu (thousand tons), 1997/98 - 2002/03 
             Retail       
    Availability Availability Price of    
  Public PDS (Production (Production 
Common          Net Imports 
  Production  Procurement Distribution + net 
PDS) + net PDS) Rice GSDP/cap Est. 1 Est. 2 
  ('000 tons) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) kgs/
person Rs('01)/kg 000 Rs(01) ('000 tons) ('000 tons) 
          
          

 97/98  6,8941,2312,2387,901131.59.6720.1556-698
 98/99  8,1417332,1219,52915710.8721.16-1,493-2,322
 99/00  7,5328912,2118,852144.511.2622.18-742-1,360

 00/01  7,2181,6912,1057,632123.511.0822.95546248
 01/02  6,8738322,2018,242132.410.7623.48       
      -                 -    
 02/03  4,860               -    2,2777,137113.811.0722.841,164828
          
Ave 97/98          
 - 01/02 7,3321,0762,1758,431137.810.7321.99-327-826

          
Difference -2,472-1,076102-1,294-240.340.861,4911,654
  -34%-100%5%-15%-17%3.10%4%-456%-200%
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  54 Figure  5.1:  Rice Prices 
in Chennai 1994:  2003 
02
468101214
1619941995
1996
1997
199819992000
2001
2002
2003Rs/kg
Wholesale Fine Rice
Wholesale Common Rice
PDS Issue Common Rice
PDS Issue Super Fine
Imp Parity 15% broken Thai
    
  55Table  5.3:  Estimates of Marketing Channels
 for Major Crops (Percentage of Farm Sales) 
  Direct   Co-operative       
 ProcurementRegulated Marketing  Private  
  Centers Markets Societies Mills/Traders Total 
       
Paddy 6 20 2  72 100 
Coarse cereals  10   90 100 
Maize  5   95 100 
Pulses  10   90 100 

Oilseeds  30  15 55 100 

Sugarcane    80 20 100 

Chillie  16   84 100 

Turmeric  70 5  25 100 
Onion     100 100 
Vegetables  10 *  90 100 

Banana     100 100 

Cotton  15 15  70 100 
Milk   45  55 100 
Note:  Private traders include sales directly to cons
umers, sales of sugar cane to jaggery processors 
and sales of milk to private dairies. Oilsee
ds include groundnut and gingelly (sesame). 
Source: TNAU (2003).  Promoting Agricultural Development in Tamil Nadu 
 5.13 Substantial private sector rice trade takes place between Tamil Nadu and the 
neighboring states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
 with exports consistently 
mainly of coarse rice and imports consisting largely 
of finer rice varieties.  Movement restrictions 
preventing the export of Tamil Nadu to other stat
es, and storage restrictions for paddy/rice by 
millers and traders were also lifted during 1993-94.
38 No data on inter-state trade exists, but rough estimates of net trade can be made on the 
basis of changes in within state supply from 
production and net public distribution (incl
uding both ration sales and various employment 
programs), together with estimates of demand derived from an assumed base year demand, 

changes in real prices and incomes, and demand parameters (
Table  5.1). 
5.14 Demand estimates for various years in 
Table  5.1 use 2001/02 as a 
base, and assume that no net private trade took place in that year.  Per 
capita availability from production (less ten percent 
for seed, feed and losses) and net public distri
bution (total distribution less procurement of 
paddy/rice in Tamil Nadu) was 134.8 kgs/person in 2001/02, slightly below the average of 139.2 
kgs/person for 1997/98 to 2001/02.  Estimates of
 consumption in other years assume either 
constant per capita demand (estimate 1) or an 
own-price elasticity of demand for rice of Œ0.5 and 
an income elasticity of demand for rice of 1.0 (estimate 2).
39                                                      
 38 Note that prior to October 2002, monopoly procurement was reinstated in several years (e.g. in 1996-97 
when 922 thousand tons were procured, as well as in 1999-00 and 2000-01), in order to assure the GoTN of 
rice supplies. 39 Estimates of the income elasticity of demand for rice range from– AIDS model estimates by Kailasam 
(1991) for households in western Tamil Nadu ranged from 0.956 to 1.241 for rural household groups and 
0.695 to 1.121 for urban household groups.  Own-price elasticities ranged from Œ0.262 to -0.530 (rural) and 
-0.278 to -0.593 (urban).  Hazell and Ramasamy (1991) 
estimates of income elasticities with a pooled data 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  56 5.15 Estimates of demand and net trade indicate that, in years of normal rainfall and 
water availability, Tamil Nadu is nearly self-sufficient in rice.
  From 1997/98 to 2001/02, 
production of paddy within the state accounted 
for an estimated 89 to 95 percent of total 
consumption for the period as a whole.  During th
ese years, net public distribution averaged 1.19 
million tons, (about 15 percent of consumption), a
nd estimated average private trade net exports 
were about 300 Œ 800 thousand tons, (equal to 3 
to 10 percent of estimated consumption).   
5.16 In 2002-03 a drought year, private net rice inflows contributed an estimated 1.0-1.3 
million tons to total availability, eq
ual to 12-16 percent of consumption. 
Because of the severe drought in 2002-03, production 
of paddy fell by 2.47 million tons (a decline of 34 percent) 
compared to the average of the previous five 
years.  Net public distribution of rice was 2.15 
million tons, equal to the level of total distri
bution, since no procurement took place. Assuming 
constant per capita demand, net private trade fl
ows are estimated at 1.32 million tons, 16 percent 
of consumption.  Alternatively, adjusting for th
e higher price rise and an estimated 2.7 percent 
decline in per capita incomes relative to 2001/02, pe
r capita rice consumption fell by 2.7 percent 
and private imports were 
only about 1.0 million tons. 
5.17 Private trade flows helped stabilize market supplies and prices (
Figure  5.1).  
The influx of 1.0-1.3 million tons of rice imports from other states (and abroad) through the private 
market trade helped stabilize prices without a majo
r increase in public distribution in the state.  
Rice prices in Tamil Nadu closely traced those in A
ndhra Pradesh (a major source of private rice 
inflows to the state), reflecting the integration of 
these markets. As a result, the retail market price 
of rice in 2002/03 in Tamil Nadu was only 2.8 pe
rcent higher in real terms (nominal prices 
deflated using the GSDP deflator) than in 200
1/02 helping to maintain access to food for poor 
consumers.  5.18 The experience of 2002/03 suggests that private rice flows can play a major role in 
stabilizing rice prices and supplies in drought ye
ars, even apart from major increases in net 
public distribution.  Given these private rice flows, made po
ssible in part by the overall rice 
supply and demand balance in India as a whole, self-sufficiency in rice is not a prerequisite for 
food security in the state.  Nonetheless, availa
bility of low-cost rice through the PDS, coupled 
with employment schemes remains important for th
e welfare of poor households, particularly in 
drought years. 
Markets for Sugar Cane and Milk 
 5.19 Marketing of sugar cane to sugar mills 
involves contract farming arrangements between farmers and the state™s  sugar mills (2 public sector mills operated by the Tamil Nadu Sugar Corporation Limited, 16 cooperative sector mi
lls, and 19 private sector mills).  The total crushing capacity of these 38 mills is 104,550 to
ns crushing per day (TCD) and about 19.0 
million tons per year. During the crushing season 
2001-2002, the mills operated at full capacity, 
crushing 19.14 million tons of cane, and producing 
18.39 million tons of sugar, with an average 
recovery rate of 9.61 percent. 
5.20 The contract farming system for sugar cane 
provides a floor price for sugar farmers (who 
always get at least the SMP price) and divides the benefits of high market prices between farmers 
and mills.  These explicit sales contracts also help 
to insure mills of regular supply of sugar cane. 
Under the contracting system for sugar cane, farmers receive initial payments equal to the 
                                                                                                                               
                               set from 1972/73 and the early 1980s ranged from 0.32 to 0.39, with own price elasticites ranging from Œ
0.17 to -0.28. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  57statutory statutory minimum price (SMP) set by the GOI multiplied by the total quantity of sales 
to the mill.  (Note that the SMP is made known 
to the farmers well in advance of the sowing 
season for sugar cane.)  When average market 
sales prices of processed sugar rise above the 
government-determined approximate average cost of
 processed sugar (the ﬁ5A priceﬂ, which is 
determined from industry average rendements
40, average processing costs, and estimated capital 
depreciation costs), a second payment is made to
 farmers, in which the sales revenues arising 
from the positive margin between th
e actual sales price and the 5A price is split evenly between 
mill and farmer.  (In Tamil Nadu, an even higher pr
ice, the State Advised Price (SAP) is paid by 
state mills, but not by private mills.)   
5.21 In Tamil Nadu, as in most of India, milk is
 sold through Milk Producers Co-operatives at 
the village level.  Farmers supply milk to the 
society at a pre-determined price based on fat 
content and solid non fat.  The society also pr
ovides technical guidance and financial assistance. 
Commodity Marketing Boards 

5.22 Commodity boards for plantation crops, su
ch as the Tea Board and Coffee Board, were established by the 
Ministry of Commerce, Government of
 India. Each Board offers various schemes to i) develop new technologies and prom
ote adoption of the same, so as to increase 
productivity, ii) provide support for various marketing 
activities, iii) to initiate efforts to promote 
exports and iv) to maintain a data 
bank and undertake extension activities. 
5.23 The Tea Board promotes tea research and exports of tea worldwide, collects and 
disseminates statistical data as well as encourag
es labor welfare programs among a host of other 
activities all aimed at ensuring the health and vibr
ancy of the world™s largest producer of tea. 
Until 1995, the Coffee Board had a monopolistic cont
rol over the marketing of coffee in India. 
However, the winds of liberalization swept the 
Indian coffee industry and since 1995, marketing 
of coffee is strictly a private sector activity. 
Contract Farming 5.24 The pace of reforms has accelerated in recen
t years and the state is now supporting 
new initiatives in contract farming and agricultural exports (Text Box  5.1).  Contract farming 
involving business agreements for purchase of output and often provision of inputs and extension advice is increasing, particularly for sugar cane,
 cotton, and horticultural crops. For medicinal 
plants, contract farming has just begun wherein the wholesaler comes in agreement with the 
farmer producers. A contract made is for an ag
reed price under the technical guidance of the 
buyer and assistance is ensured to the farm
ers in getting financial support from nationalized 
banks.  5.25 Cotton contract farming has just started 
in about 1200 hectares in 2002-03 season 
and it is expanding. 
The only difference is that the farmers 
have the option to sell cotton to the 
contractor or to any other buyer under the market
 prices prevailing during harvest period. For the 
services provided by the contractor, a nominal charge
 will be levied on the farmer on an unit area basis. 5.26 Gherkin cultivation and processing started in India in the early' 90s and at present 
is spread over 7,900 hectares in the three southe
rn states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh.
 Although gherkins can grow virtually in any part of the country, the ideal 
conditions required for growth 
prevail in these three states where the growing season extends 
through out the year. There are about twelve companies operating in the state and each company 
                                                     
 40 The yield of sugar extracted from cane. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  58has agricultural extension team of 5-25 who 
identify farmers and then enter into a buyback 
contract with them.  
5.27 Contract farming for poultry is also practiced
 in Tamil Nadu.  For broilers, firms supply 
chicks, feed, medicines and technical guidance to th
e farmers.  The firms then buy the birds when 
they are eight weeks old at a predetermined price.   
Rural Infrastructure 
 5.28 Tamil Nadu™s rural infrastructure is relative good compared to most other states in 
India, but further improvements will have high pay-offs.  
Almost 100 percent of  Hamlets  
(47, 838 out of a total of 47,853 Hamlets) in 
the state are electrified. Access to rural water supply 
is also fairly high.  Ninetly-four percent of rura
l habitations are fully covered in terms of access to 
rural water supply while the remaini
ng 6 percent are partially covered.
41Although Tamil Nadu 
has an extensive road network, further attention 
to maintenance and upgrading of rural roads in 
some regions may be warranted.   
                                                     
 41 According to GoTN definitions, a habitation is fully covered by rural water supply if the population has 
access to 40 lpcd. Partially covered habitations are ha
bitations with a water suppl
y of less than 40 lpcd. 
Draft  (not for distribution or citation) 
  59Text Box  5.1:  Contract farming in Tamil Nadu: New Initiatives for Rice  
Contract farming involves a business agreement between a farmer and a firm in which the firm 
may provide inputs, extension services, processing and 
a ready market in return 
for a guaranteed source of 
supply of the output product.  Such arrangements 
between sugar mills and cane farmers has long been 
practiced in Tamil Nadu and other parts of India.  For other products, however, restrictions on private 
sector trade motivated by a general mi
strust of traders, along with the 
structural characteristics of output 
markets (including the inability to differentiate products by quality or brand) have greatly limited the 
scope of contract farming.    
 Contract farming offers several potential benefits: it 
can reduce market risk for both farmers and firms, 
facilitate technology adoption as firms with access to capital an
d knowledge of new production 
technologies have an incentive to assist farmers in improving quality and productivity, and enhance 
quality of the final product, increasing value addition in
 processing.  Potential adverse implications of 
contract farming exist as well, though, since there is a possibility that firms may acquire significant 

market power as they expand, to
 the detriment of farmers.   
 Contractual arrangements between sugar cane farmers and sugar mills have a long history in India.  

Economies of scale in sugar processing technology, ra
pid perishibility of the product (the yield of sugar 
extracted from the cane (ﬁrendementﬂ) declines sign
ificantly within days of harvesting the cane), and 
difficulties of transporting bulky sugar cane, make fi
xed contracts between local sugar mills and farmers 
desirable from an efficiency standpoint.  To pr
otect the interests of both farmers and mills, the 
Government of India 
placed marketing regulations on sugar cane
 and created a system of administered 
prices.     Beginning in a limited way in 2002/03, EID Parry to
ok tentative steps towards establishing contract 
farming in rice.  EID Parry sold approximately 60 tons of improved seeds for super fine quality ponno 

rice (enough for about 800 hectares of rice at a seed
 rate of 75 kgs/hectare)
 and provided extension 
services to sugar cane farmers who sold sugar cane to
 the firm™s sugar mill in 
Cuddalore, and were also 
wiling to grow rice.  With the improved rice technology, paddy yields were approximately 25 percent 

higher than normal yields of 3.75
 tons/hectare.  Moreover, because of
 drought, market prices were about 
20 percent higher than the previous year.   
 EID Parry later purchased the output.  In the absence of
 an explicit sales contract, though, the firm risked 
not being able to purchase supply for its rice mills. 
In 2003/04 the firm plans to make commitments to 
farmers to procure rice at market prices from farmer
s who purchase seed.  If the trial is successful, the 
firm may providing inputs on credit and establish explicit sales contracts that are binding for farmers in 
future years.  (EID Parry™s existing contracts with
 the same farmers for sugar cane may provide an 
implicit additional enforcement mechanism to deter farmer default.) 
 The entrance of large private firms 
into rice markets has only been possible with the removal of stocking 
limits (in May 2003), and other restrictions on move
ments of paddy and rice.  Availability of new seed 
and processing technology, combined with firms™ market knowledge could make contract farming 

arrangements profitable for bot
h farmers and firms.  If quality is impr
oved, and is noticeable so that rice 
achieves higher price, firms will be able to afford to 
pay higher prices, particularly if brand names can be 
established. Maintaining competition between trader
s will remain important, however, since if firms 
significantly increase their market sh
ares, monopoly power of the firms could reduce benefits for farmers.  
Institutional arrangements (such as promotion of farmer organizations) may also be needed to make sure 
small farmers benefit, as well.  
   606. Agricultural Growth and Rural Poverty  6.1 Rural poverty is concentrated amongst rural la
ndless laborers and small farmers (especially 
those without significant amounts of irrigated land)
.  The PDS is an important safety net for the 
rural poor.  Ration sales from public stocks, co
mbined with targeted public nutrition and 
employment programs, and price-stabilizing market flows of rice from neighboring states enabled 

the state to avoid serious declines in welfare of the poor during 2002-03, a year of severe drought.  

The extent to which future agricultural growth
 reduces rural poverty will depend on the degree to 
which small farmers shift to cultivation of highe
r value crops and have access to remunerative 
markets, and labor demand increases, par
ticularly in the dry seasons.      
Rural Poverty42 6.2 The latest available data indicate that th
ere were between 7 and 11 million rural poor among Tamil Nadu™s population of  62 million in 1999/00 (
Table  6.1:). 
Findings on the 
incidence of poverty in rural versus urban 
areas in Tamil Nadu vary depending on the 
methodology used to estimate poverty lines.
43 According to the official Planning Commission 
estimates, the incidence of poverty in rural areas w
as lower than that of urban areas. The adjusted 
estimates of Deaton and Drèze (2002) arrive at 
the opposite conclusion reporting an incidence of 
poverty in urban areas less than half of that in
 rural areas.  Estimates by Kijima and Lanjouw 
(2003) also find that urban poverty is below rural 
poverty.  According to Kijima and Lanjouw, the 
estimated poverty rate in 1999/00 was 31.8 percent in
 rural areas compared to a poverty rate of  
22 percent in urban areas. The same authors also
 find that Tamil Nadu was the most poor of the 
Southern states, and had a higher incidence of 
poverty than India as a whole. These findings 
differ from those of Deaton and Drèze (2002) that reveal a slightly lower incidence of poverty in 
Tamil Nadu as compared to India as a whole.  
Table  6.1:  Poverty Estimates for Tamil Nadu  (1999/2000) 
 Head Count (%)
  No. of Poor (million)
     Urban Rural Overall Urban Rural Overall 
Indian Official Estimates 
22.1 20.6 21.1 5.6 7.4 13 
Deaton and Drèze 
(2002) 
11.3 24.3 20.0 
2.9 8.7 11.6 
Kijima and 

Lanjouw (2003) 
22.0 31.8 28.9 5.6 11.4 17 
Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003 
 6.3 Tamil Nadu™s rural poverty rates have declined over time.  
All three sets of poverty 
estimates report declining rural poverty rates althoug
h they differ in their estimates of the rate of 
decline. Kijima and Lanjouw™s (2003) estimates suggest a decline in rural poverty in Tamil Nadu 
between 1993/94 and 1999/00 of about 6.7 per
centage points compared to a decline of 14.2 
                                                     
 42 This section draws heavily on the Tamil Nadu Poverty Note:  Poverty in the 1990s, A Preliminary 
Profile and Emerging Issues by Peter Lanjouw, Rajshri Jayaraman and Yoko Kijima.  The Tamil Nadu 
poverty note provides an analysis of poverty issues in the state drawing on existing household survey data 
and village studies.  This section summarizes some of the main findings of the poverty note pertaining to 
the incidence and profile of rural poverty in the state. 
43 Refer to Lanjouw et al., 2003 for a detailed summary of the various methods and their findings. 
   61percentage points reported by Deaton and Drèze (2002).  The official Planning Commission 
estimates suggest a decline in the rura
l poverty rate of 12.3 percent.  
6.4 The limited data on rural poverty over ti
me suggests a correlation with labor and 
land productivity growth, though no definitive conclusions are possible
.  From 1987/88 to 
1999/00, rural poverty decreased from 45.6 to 20.6 
percent.  During this same period, land 
productivity grew by 3.9 percent per year and 
labor productivity increased by 3.3 percent per 
year.  Given the importance of returns to land fo
r small farm incomes a
nd labor earnings for all 
rural poor households, these gains in land and labor productivity certainly contributed to raising 
rural incomes.  However, since non-agricultura
l incomes also account for a large share of 
incomes of the poor, more data and analysis at th
e household level (ideally 
with panel data sets) would be required to quantify the effect of
 agricultural productivity gains on rural poverty. 
Figure  6.1:  Productivity and Rural Poverty 
-5,00010,00015,00020,000
25,000
30,00087/8893/9499/00
Constant 1993/94 Rupees010
20
30405060
70
80
90
100Percentage of Rural Poorlabor productivity
land productivity
rural poverty
   6.5 There are marked regional variations in the 
rural poverty with a higher incidence of 
rural poverty in the Coastal North and South
. The incidence of  rural poverty  (according to 
the Lanjouw and Kijima estimates) appears to
 be higher in the Coastal North and South.
44 Between 1993/4 and 1999/0, poverty fell in all N
SSO regions with the exception of the Coastal 
North, where the poverty incidence, based on th
e Kijima-Lanjouw adjustment methodology, is 
estimated to have risen from 21 percent to 29 percent. 
6.6 The rural poor in Tamil Nadu typically own 
less land than the non-poor and are highly represented among the marginal landowners.
   Rural poverty is concentrated among those with 
marginal landholdings, and is lowest among tho
se with relative large landholdings. The incidence 
of poverty appears to be lower among the landl
ess (non-agricultural households) as compared to 
marginal landholder (those with less than 0.4 
hectares of land). Access to land alone does not 
                                                     
 44 Coastal North districts include Chennai, Thiruvalluvar, Kancheepuram, Thiruvannamalai, Vellore, 
Villupuram, Cuddalore.  South districts include Tiru
chirapalli, Parambalur, Ariy
alur, Karur, Nagapattinam, 
Thiruvarur, Thanjavur, Pudukkottai. Coastal districts include  Dindigul, Madurai, Theni, Virudhunagar, 
Sivaganga, Ramanathapuram, Thoothukkudi, Tirunelveli, Kanniyakumari.  Inland districts include 

Coimbatore, Nilgiris, Erode, Namakkal, Salem, Dharmapuri. These regional classifications are based on the 
National Sample Survey Organization™s regional zonal classifications. 
Source:  Authors™ Calculations.   
Note:  Poverty rates are based on the unadjus
ted official Planning Commission poverty lines 
which overestimate the decline in poverty rates due
 to non-comparability of
 the expenditure data 
between the 55th round and previous rounds of the NSS. 
   62allow rural households to escape poverty. Estimates from 1999/00 reveal that 20 percent of  
households owning more than 4 hectares of land
 were poor  (fell in the bottom two quintiles of 
per capita consumption) compared to an pove
rty incidence of 45 percent among marginal 
landholders.  6.7 In Tamil Nadu the risk of poverty is co
nsiderably more pronounced amongst those 
whose land is not irrigated. According to estimates from 1999/00, approximately 42.1 percent 
of households without irrigation were poor (per 
capita consumption rank of less than 40 percent) 
as compared to 33.8 percent of household with
 irrigation. Among marginal landholders 45.4 
percent of households without access to irrigation were poor compared to a poverty incidence of 
39.3 percent among marginal landholders
 with access to irrigation.   
6.8 The rural poor are more likely to be reliant on agriculture as a source of income.  
Farming contributes to over 50 percent of rura
l income. The poorest households (those in the lowest income quintile) receive almost 78 pe
rcent of these income from cultivation and 
agricultural wage labor.  In fact, almost 52 per
cent of the income of the poorest households can 
be attributed to agricultural wage labor alone. 
As one moves from the lowest to highest income 
quintiles,  the contribution of agricultural wage 
income to total income decreases monotonically, 
while that of cultivation and non-farm sources in
creases monotically.  Wealthier rural households 
appear to have access to more assets (physical a
nd human capital) allowing them to participate in 
more remunerative non-farm employment activities. 
6.9 About one-fifth of the population in Tamil Na
du belongs to scheduled castes or tribes 
whose average standard of living is cons
iderably below the rest of the population.
  Eighty-
eight percent of SC/ST households owned less 
than 0.4 hectares of land in 1999/00. SC/ST 
households have a lower mean per capita consum
ption as well as lower levels of education as 
compared to non-SC/ST households. Scheduled cast
e and scheduled tribe population groups are 
highly represented in agricultural wage labor ac
tivities and  are particularly under-represented 
among cultivators and in regular non-farm employment.   
Table  6.2:  Farm Income Shares in Tamil Nadu 
Quintile CultivationAgriculture 
wage Labor
Total 
Nonfarm sources Other 
sourcesReal Per Capita 
Income Lowest 26.351.619.82.31,093
Q2 27.827.543.21.62,130
Q3 32.621.644.41.43,377
Q4 35.714.945.545,431
Highest 42.85.250.41.612,292
Total 37.713.746.42.14,867
  Source:   Lanjouw, Jayaraman and Kijima, 2003
  6.10 In both urban and rural areas, average consum
ption levels of households where the head 
had completed secondary education or higher are 
about twice as high as when the household head 
was illiterate. 
Labor Markets 6.11 Real wage rates in agriculture have risen steadily in the 1990s.
  The average annual increase in the real wage for male labor for harvesting increased from 2.8 percent per year during 
1986-92 to 7.2 percent per year during 1993-2001 (
Table  6.3).  During this latter period (1993-
2001), paddy and rice prices declined by an average 
of 2.0 percent per year in real terms due to 
increased productivity (yields) of paddy in Tamil Na
du, and in recent years, the declining cost of 
   63imported rice in neighboring states
.  Thus, the real wage in terms of paddy (rice) grew by an 
average of 9.8 percent per year from 1992/93 to 2000/01, again indicating increased purchasing 
power for rural laborers (
Figure  6.2).   
Table  6.3:  Real rural wages in Tamil Nadu, 1986-2001 
        1986-92 1993-2001 1986-2001
 1986-881999-01Percent% growth% growth % growth
  Rs(2000)Rs(2000)Changerate rate rate 
       
Rural Wage Rate I (Rs 2001/day)
a, b  36.772.798.2%2.8%7.2%5.2%
Rural Wage Rate II (Rs 2001/day)
 a,c 3971.483.0%3.2%4.9%4.8%
Paddy Price Wholesale (Rs 2001/kg) 
b 6.584.87-26.0%0.7%-2.8%-2.5%
Rural Wage Rate I/ Rice Price (kgs/day)
 d 3.7510.01167.1%2.1%10.3%7.9%
a Wage rate for male labor for harvesting activities; 
 b Using the state GSDP price index as a deflator; 
c Using the state rural CPI price index as a deflator; 
d Using conversion factor of 1 kg paddy = 0.67 kgs rice.
  Figure  6.2:  Real Paddy Prices and Rural Wage Rates in Tamil Nadu 
0501001502002501985-86
1986-87

1987-88

1988-89

1989-90
1990-91

1991-92

1992-93
1993-94
1994-95

1995-96

1996-97

1997-98

1998-99

1999-00
2000-01
Index (1985/86 = 100)
Wholesale Paddy Price
Real Wage Rate GSDPdef
Real Wage Rate (RCPI)
   6.12 A declining rural labor force reflecting sign
ificant rural-urban migration, is one 
major factor behind the rise in real agricultural wages.  
According to the Population Census, 
total population in the state increased by 6.25 million people (11.2 percent)  between 1991 and 
2001.  In this period, urban 
population grew by 8.16 million people (42.8 percent); rural 
population actually declined by 1.91 million (5.2
 percent).  The rural population was thus 12.8 
percent less than it would have been if both the 
rural and urban populations
 increased by the same 
state-wide rate (11.2 percent).   6.13 For farmers that hire labor, however,
 increased labor costs imply reduced 
profitability.  Increases in labor costs have been partia
lly offset by increases in yields, thus 
limiting the decline in farmer paddy incomes.  More
over, higher costs of labor have encouraged 
mechanization, including the use of power tillers 
for land preparation and mechanical harvesters for paddy.  Nonetheless, higher labor costs are adversely affecting incomes of commercial 
farmers in Tamil Nadu, particularly in areas 
where urban and rural non-farm employment are 
   64increasing, such as the western zone (with its textile and other industries around Coimbatore) and 
in the northeast near Chennai.   Technological Change and  Rural Poverty 
 6.14 Despite concerns that the green revolution technology for rice (improved seeds, 
increased fertilizer use and irrigation) would 
lead to increased income inequality, most 
rural household groups benefited from increa
sed rice production in the 1970s and early 1980s.  Household surveys of farmers in North Ar
cot district (now Vellore and Thiruvannamalai 
[check]) indicated that, although the first adopters of the rice technology tended to be larger 
farmers, by the early 1980s small farmers in v
illages with access to irrigation had also adopted the new technologies at the same rate as large 
farmers (Hazell and Ramasamy, 1991).  Moreover, 
land distribution had remained essentially unch
anged, and agricultural wage earnings for 
agricultural laborers increased (though real 
agricultural wage rates did not increase). 
 6.15 Moreover, increased rice production led 
to substantial rural growth linkages, adding 
an additional 0.87 rupees of value added for ev
ery 1 rupee of value added from additional rice 
production.  One-half of these multiplier effects 
were due to increased demand for agricultural 
inputs, marketing and processing services; the 
remainder derived from increased consumer 
demands as household incomes rose. 

6.16 Survey results showed that real incomes of small paddy farmers and landless laborers 
rose by 90 and 125 percent, respectively, between 1973/74 to 1983/84.  Incomes of non-
agricultural households also rose by 55 percent, 
due in part to the growth linkage effects 
emanating from agricultural growth.  Real inco
me gains of large paddy farmers were only 18 
percent, due to increased costs of fertilizer and labor.  Notably, non-paddy with no access to 

irrigated land saw real income gains of only 17 percent. 
6.17 On an all-India scale, agricultural productivity growth from 1958-1994 played a 
major role in reducing poverty in India. 45  During this period, agricultural output per acre of 
net sown area grew by 2.91 percent per year, c
ontributing to higher real wages for agricultural 
laborers (which grew by 2.84 percent per year) and a decline in the real price of food.  (The price 
of food relative to agricultural laborers™ consumer price index fell by 0.15 percent per year from 
1976-94, after having increased by 0.62 percent per year from 1958-75.)  Higher farm yields for 
small producers also contributed directly to thei
r incomes, both directly through increased value 
of output and indirectly through increased employment.     
6.18 Whether future agricultural growth reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu reduces rural 
poverty will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new technologies and have 
access to markets, the magnitude of employmen
t and real wage rate gains, and the size of 
linkage effects with rural non-agriculture
.  Further reductions in the real price of food are not 
likely given the already low food prices (particularly in Tamil Nadu where the poor have access 
to subsidized rice through the PDS).  Land distribu
tion is unlikely to become more egalitarian and 
thus contribute to a redistribution of incomes, a
nd could even become more concentrated instead.   
6.19 Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor.
  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
                                                     
 45   Datt and Ravallion, 1998, Farm productivity and rural poverty in India, Journal of Development 
Studies, No. 34, April 
   65season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops will 
be crucial, however.  Contract farming ma
y help overcome these problems, if competition 
between firms helps farmers maintain their shar
e of the value of the final product sales.   
6.20 The reduction in poverty is also likely to 
be greater if small farmers are able to 
participate in production and sales gains from off-season crops.
  New technologies like drip 
irrigation require substantial investments, and 
large farmers to adopt these technologies and shift 
to cultivation of higher value crops more quickly 
than small farmers.  Government programs to 
provide credit to small farmers were instrument
al in increasing adoption rates of rice technology in the 1970s and 1980s; the feasibility of similar 
targeted credit programs should be explored.   
      667. Conclusions and Policy Options 
 7.1 Traditional sources of agricultural growth
 in Tamil Nadu face major constraints
.  Seasonal water shortages, increasing land degradatio
n, continually shrinking farm sizes and rising 
costs of agricultural labor represent serious constrai
nts that need to be overcome if future growth 
in agriculture is to be realized. Further gains in rice production (a major engine of agricultural 
growth in the past four decades) will be hard to
 achieve, and may not be the most efficient use of 
resources in the context of national grain surpluses and the significant water requirements of rice 

cultivation.   7.2 Given the existing constraints, diversification into less water-intensive higher-value 
products, including fruits, vegetables, spices, and livestock products, is one of the most 
promising avenues for increasing agricultural growth. Tamil Nadu™s agro-climatic conditions 
are well suited to diversified agriculture. Furthe
rmore, rapidly increasing incomes and changing 
food demand patterns provide strong impetus fo
r diversification. Increased agricultural 
diversification and private investments in processing for many of the higher valued agricultural 
commodities are likely to generate new rural no
n-farm employment opportunities and contribute 
to higher rural incomes.
   7.3 Overcoming the constraints faced by the 
agricultural sector in Tamil Nadu, and 
accelerating growth in agricultural production 
and the rate of rural poverty reduction, will 
require appropriate policies and inv
estments in four priority areas
: improving the efficiency 
of water use; increasing the effectiveness of public expenditures and agricultural extension; 
spurring the development of agricultural markets; 
and maximizing the real income growth of the 
rural poor. Increasing the Efficiency of Water Use 
7.4 Long-term growth in agriculture and rural incomes depends in large part on 
increasing the efficiency of use of water
.  7.5 Tamil Nadu has already taken some important
 steps in expenditure and organization 
reforms in irrigation and drainage institutions th
at are vital to improving the delivery of surface 
irrigation services and helping to ensure the longer-term performance of irrigation infrastructure.   
Further organizational reforms to streamline 
business processes to enhance efficiency and 
transparency and professionalize the work culture
 will be essential to improving service delivery 
to the client farmers, reduce costs of servi
ce provision (especially by modernizing and 
rightsizing), ensure financial sustainability of op
erations and maintenance of systems, and reduce 
the fiscal burden to state governments. 
7.6 More specifically, there are several options that Tamil Nadu could consider to manage its 
scarce water resources. These include: 
scaling up the pilot river-basin framework
 for managing water resources holistically, 
allowing interagency coordination and public-private 
partnerships; introducing specific legally enforceable 
water entitlements
 to various users in a river basin and or aquifer framework; 
changes in electricity, water and crop prices
 to change 
the financial incentives for irrigation and crop choice; 
improved management practices and 
irrigation technologies (such as drip and sprinkler irrigation) and 
new investments in canals and 
water storage (coupled with impr
oved operation and maintenance).
 7.7 Public administration in the water sector could be improved by separating the 
responsibilities for water resource management and irrigation service delivery
.  Tamil Nadu 
is the only state in India without a separate department of irrigation: administration of irrigation 
in the state is part of the Department of 
Public Works.  Two new agencies are needed: a 
   67regulatory agency to allocate the share of wate
r resources to agriculture, industry and other uses, 
and a irrigation department focusing on irrigation delivery systems.  A separate irrigation 
department would allow for the creation of a specia
lized cadre of irrigation specialists, instead of 
the current setup where staff from the Departme
nt of Public Works (which also includes administration of public buildings) are res
ponsible for delivering irrigation services.   
7.8 Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) is at an early stage in Tamil Nadu and 
WUAs are yet to be fully functional.  
There is a need to expedite the transfer of irrigation 
management to farmers in line with the FMIS 
Act so that water distribution would be more 
efficient and equitable.   7.9 The Government of Tamil Nadu recently a
nnounced increases in irrigation water 
charges and reintroduced a tariff for agricultural power consumers
. While these recent 
reforms are a step in the right direction, chargi
ng for water on a per area basis (as is the case for 
surface irrigation) or on a flat rate basis (for agricultural power consumers) is not efficient from 
an economic point of view as the marginal cost for water is almost zero and hence it does not 
affect the demand for irrigation water. 7.10  Irrigation water charges were revised  in July 2003
.  Previously, water charges were 
levied by the GoTN at a base rate (which va
ried according to crop, season, soil quality etc) 
coupled with an additional cess equivalent to six times the base rate.  This additional cess was transferred to the local panchayats.  Under the ne
w system of charges an additional water charge 
of Rs 150/ha de-linked from any additional cess ha
s been imposed.  Thus the farmer will pay the 
original charge plus the Rs 150/ha.  In add
ition, the FMIS Act empowers the water user™s 
associations (WUA) to charge users between  Rs 
250/ha to Rs 500/ha.  This additional charge can 
be retained by the WUA for operation and maintena
nce of the systems turned over to them. The 
current provisions for irrigation water charges woul
d be sufficient to allow full cost recovery of 
required O&M expenditures. The extent to which fa
rmers are actually being charged the proposed 
water rates remains unclear.  
 7.11 In 2002 an agricultural power tariff was introduced bringing an end to 12 years of 
free electricity for Tamil Nadu™s farmers.  
The revised agricultural power tariff included a flat rate for unmetered connections of Rs.250 per HP per annum and Rs.0.20/kWh for metered 
connections.  In conjunction with the reintr
oduction of the agricultural power tariff the 
government announced a pilot income support scheme 
for small and marginal farmers.  However, 
the reintroduction of the agriculture power tariff b
ecame a highly contentious issue in Tamil Nadu 
during the recent national election, and after a significant loss of seats in the national parliament, 
the TN government has reversed the policy.
 7.12 Other states also introduced tariffs in recent years (
Text Box  7.1).  International 
experience with income support programs also pr
ovides several important lessons for providing 
clear incentives and containing fiscal costs, including the need for targe
ting to poorer farmers 
(e.g., paying less per hectare as farm size increases, with a ceiling on the numbers of hectares 
eligible for payment), an effective delivery sy
stem for the transfer payments, and a limit on the 
number of years for which producers will be eligible for payments (
Table  7.1).
     68Text Box  7.1:  Pilot Initiatives in Reforming Power Supply to Farmers 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
  7.13 Introduction of a flat rate charges of Rs 250/year for a 5 horsepower pumpset (a 
policy that has now been reversed) would have only
 a small effect on net returns to land and 
management, reducing them by only 4.9 to 
6.5 percent for major crops grown with well 
irrigation.  Costs of crop cultivation using well irrigation would rise by only 625 Rs/ha for most 
crops (the annual charge pro-rated for one season) to 1250 Rs/ha (for sugar cane grown over 
eleven months). 
However, if electricity charges are 
raised to the estimated marginal 
economic price of electricity to agriculture of 
3.1 Rs/Kwh, electricity costs rise to about 
4,600 Rs/ha for paddy and sugar
 cane, reducing returns to land and management by 35.9 
percent for rice and 23.8 percent for sugar cane
.  Likewise, total returns to land, labor and 
capital (value added) fall sharply for paddy and s
ugar cane irrigated by wells when the cost of 
electricity for pumping is included.  If electricity is costed at its economic price, total income 
generated from cotton cultivation 
(23,949 Rs/ha) is 53 percent greater than that for rice.  
Including the subsidy on fertilizer (through the Go
I), raises the total subsidy on rice and sugar 
cane cultivated with well irrigation to 41.1 and 40.3  
percent of net financial returns at the flat rate 
cost of electricity. 
7.14 Such large policy-induced reductions in returns for farmers are likely to be 
politically infeasible (as indicated by the re
cent election results), but gradual step towards 
marginal cost pricing of electricity, (perhaps 
combined with compensa
tion to farmers in the 
form of income transfers or a more reliable electricity supply), would help rationalize water 
use in Tamil Nadu
.  If their costs and incomes varied according to the amount of electricity (and 
water) used with well irrigation, farmers would 
have an incentive to shift some land from water-
intensive crops (rice and sugar cane) towards less
 water-intensive crops (including cotton, maize 
and vegetables). Greater attenti
on to marketing infrastructure, strengthening the research and 
extension to meet the needs of diversified agriculture, the development of tools for farmers to 
better manage risks, and improving irrigation pum
pset efficiency may create an environment 
within which higher power charges woul
d be more palatable for farmers. 
Andhra Pradesh. In 2003, Andhra Pradesh initiated a ﬁtatkalﬂ
 scheme under which farmers seeking immediate 
connection are required to pay Rs. 1/kWh to expedite the connection of the utilities.  
The current rate for farmers is Rs. 0.25
/kWh 
(full cost is Rs. 4/kWh).  Under this scheme, 30,000 new conn
ections were provided during th
e year by the utilities.  The 
government and the utilities are also separating the supply of pow
er to farmers from the other 
consumers, by splitting the 11kV
 rural 
feeders.  This initiative has several me
rits, including the potential to monitor the reliability and quality of power supply to
 farmers 
and an increase in cost recovery. However, investment 
cost is high at  Rs. 10 million for each 11kV feeder.   
Karnataka.
 The State Electricity Board in Karnataka recently
 initiated a program called ﬁOwn Your Transformer 
Scheme for Irrigation Pumpsets,ﬂ involving 
the drawing of 11 kV HT line under High Volta
ge Distribution System to the premise o
f pumpset consumers and providing them with small capacity transfor
mers.  The government is asking farmers to share equally the 
cost of the investment with the utilities, which is estimated 
at about Rs. 50 billion.  The scheme has the potential to reduce 
losses 
and improve the quality of supply. But the cost of the program 
is substantial. Given the cost sharing arrangement, it is likely
 that the 
scheme would benefit mostly large farmers.   As a means to 
target the subsidies, the Karnat
aka regulatory commission for the 
purpose of determining different tariffs has classified farmers acco
rding to the number of tubewells
 they own, and to the fact 
that 
they do not perceive income from ot
her activities such as
 civil servants. User associations. The Electricity Act, 2003, provides for the Uni
on Government to issue a National Policy permitting 
stand alone systems (including those based 
on renewable sources of energy and non-conventional sources of energy) for rural are
as, 
and a National Policy for rural electrification and for bulk purchas
e of power and management of local distribution in rural ar
eas through Panchayat Institutions, users™ associ
ations, co-operatives societies, non-Governmental organizations or franchisees.  T
hese institutional models have been piloted in I
ndia.  In terms of internal efficiency, 
some cooperatives are working well while oth
ers are 
not.  In cases where it did not work well, 
one major cause was the lack of penalties in
 defaulting in payments to the public el
ectric 
utility.  The institutional model potentially promising, provided 
there is the willingness to proceed with disconnections in ca
se of 
non-payments.  
Source: Lucio Monari, 2003 as cited in World Bank, 2004
    69Table  7.1:  Selected Country Experi
ences with Agricultural Subsidy Reform 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 Farmer Income Support Programs 
  Salient Features 
 EU: Common 
Agricultural Policy  Mexico: 

PROCAMPO  
US: Agricultural 

Market Transition 

Act and Farm 
Security and Rural 
Investment Act 
Turkey Direct 

Income Support 

Program  
  New Zealand: 
Farming without 

Subsidies Objective Compensate 
producers from 
a reduction in 
support prices 
Compensate 
farmers for  

reduced income 
with elimination 
of support prices 

on selected crops due to NAFTA  
Compensate farmers 
for removal of 

deficiency payments, 
counter-cyclical 
support of farm 

income, maintain 
budget discipline 
Compensate 
farmers for  

reduced income 
due to removal of 
support prices and 

subsidies  Removal  of trade 
protection and govt 

interventions in  agriculture and agro-
industry, public sector 

& institutional reform 
& privatization except 
for public goods aspect 

of research  
Time Frame Fixed in 
nominal terms; 
no expiration 
date but subject 
to CAP reforms 
Total of 15 years; 
first 10 years fixed 
in real terms; 
declining in the 
last 5 years 

 1996 Act expired in 
2002.  2002 Act 
expires in 2007. 
No end date. 10 years 
Implemented 1993 1994 
 1996, 2002 2001 1984  
Payment basis Average 
acreage in 
support crops 
during 1989-

1991 $78 per ha in 
support crops up 
to 100 ha (2000) 
for each growing 

season. Must show 
evidence of land 
ownership and 

use, based on  
average acreage 
during 1991-93 
Fixed payment rate 
per unit output and 
variable payment rate 
that increases as 

market prices 
decrease, paid on 
each farm™s historical 
acreage and yields 
for supported 
commodities 
$110 per ha of 
land area sown as 
shown by 
cadastral records, 

originally capped at 20 ha; now 50 
ha  Total withdrawal of 
concessionary loans &  
support payments, 
subsidy schemes &  

preferential tax treatment   
Applicable commodities 
Wheat, maize, 

barley, rye, 

oats, rapeseed 
sunflower, 
soybeans, dried 

pulses, beans, tobacco, beef, 
lamb 
Wheat, maize, 
sorghum, barley, 

rice, cotton, beans, 
soybeans, 
safflower 
Wheat, maize 
sorghum, 
barley, rice, 
cotton, oats 
All crops eligible for support under 

the previous 
programs 
 None Payment limits None $ 6,700 per farm $40,000 + possible 
$20,000 on each of 
two subsidiary farms.  
$ 5,000 per farm 

 One time assistance for 

debt restructuring for 

some farmers.. 
Restriction on the 

use of land 
   
   
 Allocated to support crops; 

large producers 
must put into 
fallow a 
predetermined 
level of support-crop 

land. 
Allocated to support crops, but 

since 1996 land could be used for 
other agricultural 

uses Must remain in 
farming, no increase 

in fruit or vegetable 
area; must be in 
compliance with 

existing conservation 
plans Land has to be 
cultivated but includes fallow land. None. 
Estimated Fiscal 
Costs  $919 million 
(1998), price 
support 
reintroduced for 
some crops in 
2002. 
$15 billion per year 
under 1996 Act; 
projected; similar 
levels projected 

under 2002 Act 
$1.8 billion per year (2003) 
Fiscal savings Ag share in GDP  5% 1% 14% 5% 
Rural/Total  Popn  25% 20% 35% 3% 
Total Farmers  5 million 2.
1 million 4.1 million 109,000 
Source:  World Bank, 2004 
   707.15 Increases in electricity charges would h
ave only small effects on overall rice 
production and market prices, but major impl
ications for sugar cane production in the 
state.  Since only about 10 percent of rice area cultiv
ated is irrigated with well water (about 200 thousand hectares), changes in electricity pricing 
would have only marginal effects on total rice 
production in the state.  Moreover, since net pub
lic distribution (averaging 1.2 million tons per 
year from 1997/98-2001/02, 18 percent of net production) and private market trade from 
neighboring states (estimated at 1.0 Œ 1.3 million tons in the drought year 2002/03) are major 

sources of supply of rice, the effect of lower 
rice production from well water-irrigated areas on 
market prices of rice would likely be small.
 Impacts on sugar cane production would be much 
more significant, however, as essentially all of ar
ea is irrigated in part with well water.  
 7.16 Greater attention is also need for scaling-
up the adoption of water saving irrigation technologies and modernizing irrigation infrastructure
. While the use of sprinkler and drip 
technology has been promoted in the state, th
e high capital cost of these technologies currently 
poses a constraint to widespread adoption by marg
inal and small farmers and greater attention to 
development of more affordable technologies is 
warranted or a suitable system of targeted 
subsidies should be developed to scale-up the use of sprinkler and drip systems. 
7.17 Improving the productivity of rainfed agriculture will require new investments and 
increased emphasis on
 community participation with sound technical inputs
 to improve the 
success of watershed programs.
 A basin perspective should be adopted in implementation of 
all watershed programs
 to ensure that these initiatives do not have negative impacts on 
downstream human and ecological uses
. Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Ex
penditures and Agricultural Extension  7.18 A highly effective research and agricultural ex
tension system is needed to respond to 
the needs of diversified agriculture.  An assessment of the state™s comparative advantage in 
producing higher value crops for the domestic a
nd export markets would also help in setting 
future research and development priorities.  Re
-orienting agricultural research to make it more 
farmer-responsive would likewise improve the outpu
t of a system that has enjoyed much success 
in rice technology development in the past. Simila
rly, the current extension system in the state 
remains organized around a modified Training and Visit approach and continues to be highly 
focused on major food-grains, though the promotion of
 public-private partnerships in extension is 
a very encouraging recent  development and offe
rs potential for both cost-savings and greater 
efficiency (
Figure  7.1).  Thus, it is recommended that the GoTN develop a new agricultural 
extension strategy to meet the changing needs 
of farmers. This could include adopting an 
integrated and decentralized extension system th
at could help build farmer organizations that 
could link with private firms to increase economic growth in rural areas.   
7.19 Rationalizing public expenditures and shi
fting expenditures from subsidies to 
investments in key public goods such rural 
roads, markets and agricultural research and 
extension will facilitate productivity improve
ments and diversification of agriculture to higher value products
. Tightening competition for limited fiscal resources heightens the urgency 
of appropriate public expenditure reallocati
on. Institutional reforms within government 
departments to ensure improved quality of deliver
y of rural-related public goods and services is 
also important. 
   
    71Figure  7.1:  Alternatives for Public-Private 
Financing and Provision of Extension Services 
Financing of Extension Services 
  Public Private (Farmers) Private (Other) 
Public  Traditional extension  Fee-for-service extension 
 Contracts with public 
institutions   Service Provision 
Private 
 Subsidies to private extension service 

providers 
 Publicly-financed 
contracts for extension 
services  Commercial advisory 
services 
 Sale of newspapers, 
magazines 
 Information provided 
with sale of inputs 
 Extension provided to 
contract growers 
 Advertising in 
newspapers, radio, 
television, magazines 
   Promoting the Development of Well Functioning Agricultural Markets  7.20 Well functioning agricultural markets are al
so important for successful agricultural 
diversification. If recent policy reforms removing restrictions on purchase, movement, stocking 
and sales of paddy and 13 other crops are consisten
tly implemented at the local level, they can be 
expected to improve marketing efficiency
, reducing the margin between producer and 
consumer/export prices. Reductions in marketing 
costs are also necessary in order for production 
increases to lead to higher agricu
ltural incomes, particularly for perishable high-value products 
(e.g. fruits, vegetables, animal products). Contr
act farming and other private sector initiatives 
should be encouraged, though the impact of
 these business arrangements on farmer incomes 
should be evaluated, as well (
Text Box  7.2).  
7.21 There remain, however, important roles for the public sector in promoting agro-
food system and agro-enterprise development (
Text Box  7.3
).  In addition to policies that 
establish ﬁrules of the gameﬂ and address market fa
ilures, public investments in rural roads to 
strengthen rural connectivity can contribute to re
duced costs of marketing.  Although Tamil Nadu 
has an extensive road network, further attention 
to maintenance and upgrading of rural roads in 
some regions may be warranted.  
Given the rapidly changing nature of markets in Tamil Nadu, an 
in-depth study of market structure and 
investment needs would be useful.   
7.22 Increasing agricultural diversification will not compromise Tamil Nadu™s food 
security objectives given an effective PDS, we
ll-functioning markets and targeted nutrition programs
.  Greater food security has largely been 
achieved through increases in state production of major staples (especially rice), sales of subsidized rice through the PDS, school feeding 
programs, and targeted relief programs during droughts. During the recent drought of  2002/03 
the wholesale prices of rice only rose 2.8 percent (in real terms) above the previous year™s price, 

despite a 34 percent fall in paddy production in th
e state, helping to maintain access to food for 
poor consumers. This was largely due to privat
e sector inflows from neighboring states of Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka and the ava
ilability of rice through the PDS. 
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Source:  Source:  Alex, et al. 2001, Rura
l Extension and Advisory Services, New Di
rections, Rural Strategy Background Paper 
No. 9, Washington, DC: World Bank. 
   72 Text Box  7.2:  Contract Farming in Punjab 
 Maximizing Real Income Growth for the Poor 
 7.23 Increasing employment and earnings in th
e dry season is especially important for 
the rural poor
.  Increased availability of water and great
er efficiency of water use in the dry 
season (for example, through the widespread adoption 
of drip irrigation) could enable cultivation 
of crops year-round, providing employment in
 agricultural production and processing.  
Dissemination of new production technology and establishing markets for dry season crops 
remains an important unresolved issue, however.  Contract farming may help overcome these 
problems, if competition between firms helps farmers 
maintain their share of the value of the final 
product sales.  The experience of Latin America 
and the Caribbean suggests that education, 
transport infrastructure, and engines of non-farm
 growth that promote female employment are 
key aspects of a success strategy
 to promote non-farm growth 
and rural poverty reduction (Box 
7.4). 7.24 Whether agricultural diversification reduces poverty in Tamil Nadu will depend on the extent to which small farmers adopt new 
technologies and have access to markets, the 
magnitude of employment and real wage rate gains, and the size of linkage effects with 
rural non-agriculture. An assessment of the implications
 for rural poverty reduction of an 
agricultural diversification strategy involving cap
ital-intensive technologies (e.g. drip irrigation) 
and higher-risk crops is needed. . This assessment
 should include a review of crop and  drought 
insurance instruments and the potential for innova
tions in these instruments to enable rural 
households, particularly the poor, to better ma
nage the new and existing risks they face. 
 Contract farming
 is production and marketing arrange
ment between farmers and processi
ng and/or marketing firms for the 
production and supply of agricultural products under forward agreemen
ts, frequently at pre-determined prices.  In Punjab, the 
state government has assigned the task of pr
omoting contract farming in the state to 
the Punjab Agro Foodgrains Corporation 
(PAFC), for which it has developed a five-year plan that aims 
to shift one million hectares out
 of rice-wheat cultivation to a 
variety of other crops.  PAFC sees its approach to be that 
of a facilitator, tying up farmers with agribusinesses which will 
supply quality seeds and technical assistance,
 and buy back the crop.  Various models
 are being tried out, but it is still too 
early to judge their effectiveness.   
 
Punjab agriculture appears to be well-suite
d for contract farming in terms of its 
physical and social environment Œ highly 
productive agriculture with assured irrigation, widespread
 mechanization, all villages connected by roads, good 
telecommunications, and average farm size more than twice the 
India average.  Moreover, PAFC™s venture into this field 
embodies a more market-oriented approach 
to agricultural development and a significan
t shift away from the state™s traditional 
focus on production as an end in itself.   

 
International experience suggests that cont
ract farming tends to succeed only in cer
tain types of crops/activities such as 
perishable products, or those where exacting market specifications 
have to be met.  Basic field crops like standard rice, wheat
, maize, oilseeds, pulses do not normally figur
e highly in contract farmi
ng programs and there is also a high risk of ‚side selli
ng™ i.e., farmer will sell output to another buyer.    
 The absence of a quick and effective contract enforcement and 
dispute resolution system in Punjab (and India) magnifies the 
risk of farmers ‚side selling™ if market prices at time of ha
rvest significantly exceed the contr
acted price, or conversely the
 risk 
of buyer default if market prices are we
ll below the contract price.  To address 
this, the state government needs to facilitate
 initiatives by agribusiness and fa
rmers organizations wishing to 
develop speedy dispute-resolution systems.  This might lead to
 a system for registration of contracts.  
The government™s role should generally be li
mited to that of a facilitator, however, s
ince 
to be successful, dispute-resolutions syst
ems are best designed by the interested 
parties.  Likewise, direct commercial 
involvement of the state should be minimal.  In some of the 
models being adopted this is not the case as PAFC is exposing 
itself to a high degree of risk by contracting to 
buy output from farmers in case the buyer backs out. 
  Source: World Bank 2003b
    73Text Box  7.3:  Role of Government in Agro
-Food System and Agro-Enterprise Development 
 Text Box  7.4:  Promoting the Rural Non-farm Economy: Lessons from Latin America and the 
Caribbean  Setting and ensuring enforcement of transparent and consistent ‚Rules of the Game™ 
 Establish and enforce rules which define and allocate prope
rty rights (i.e. property and 
bankruptcy laws; intellectual 
property rights; zoning regulations) 
 Establish and enforce rules which defi
ne permissible and non-perm
issible forms of cooperation and competition (i.e. 
licensing laws, laws of contract and liability, 
company and cooperative laws; anti-trust laws) 
 Establish and ensure compliance with bio-safety, f
ood safety, worker safety, 
and sanitation regulations 
 Negotiate favorable terms for access to international market
s and ensure fair practices on the part of international 
trading partners 
Addressing Market Failures 
 Ensure that the country is protected from the harmful 
introduction/spread of plant pests and animal diseases 
 Ensure the availability of (production, pr
ice, industry) information and statistic
s to facilitate market activity and to 
monitor market progress 
 Invest in or facilitate risk management instruments for agri
business system participants (e
.g. futures contracts, options, 
negotiable warehouse receipts, crop insurance) 
 Compensate for unbalanced power relationships within th
e agribusiness system by monitoring potential abuses of 
market power, by providing training a
nd information, and/or by supporting 
organizational development among weak 
participants  Compensate losers in structural refo
rm processes through safety nets a
nd other transitional targeted programs 
Build Physical and Knowledge Capital 
 Invest in social overhead infras
tructure, especially that rela
ted to transport, and energy 
 Invest in knowledge-building to accelerate the agribusiness 
learning process and better enable the emergent private 
sector to participate/compete (i.e. R&D; academic/technical training) 
 Facilitate development of agricultural marketing f
acilities (i.e. marketplaces; wholesale markets)  
 Source: World Bank 2003c as cited in World Bank, 2004.
 The experience of Latin America and the Ca
ribbean in promoting the growth of the rural non-farm economy suggests some basic 
policy principles:   Agricultural policies can promote non-farm activities 
such as agro-processing and the other industrial, 
commercial and service sectors that characterize modern
 agriculture.  Agricultural 
policies in areas such as 
technology generation and diffus
ion, infrastructure, education, agrarian 
reform, credit, etc., should therefore be 
designed and developed with
 these links in mind. 
 Projects and policies aimed at promoting the rural non-
farm economy should not just focus on improving the 
capacity of households to become involved in the non farm
 economy, but should also st
imulate the engines that 
pull rural households into it.  Touris
m and manufacturing are examples of su
ch engines that are not traditionally viewed as part of the rural landscape.  Engines of
 non-farm growth that offer employment to women in 
particular, should be emphasized. 
 Local governments and institutional participation will need
 to be engaged in a whole variety of capacities, 
ranging from land use planning, educ
ation provision, infrastructure inve
stment, regulations, training, and 
financing. 
 Efforts must be directed to ensu
ring public institutions with responsibilities relating to non-farm activities 
(education, public works, small-scale industry, etc.) c
oordinate efforts and long beyond traditional competencies 
to include the non-farm economy.  Education and transport 
infrastructure in particul
ar, must receive concerted 
attention.  Richer and poorer zones must be treated differently, wi
th less emphasis in richer 
zones on subsidization and more on reducing transactions costs.  In poorer zones,
 public interventions to provide the basic enabling 
environment will continue to be required.   
Source: Julio A. Berdegue, Thomas Reardon, German Esc
obar, 2000 and  World Bank 2003d as
 cited in World Bank, 2004a.
    748. References 
 Alex, G., W. Zijp, and D. Byerlee. 2002. 
Rural Extension and Advisory ServicesŠNew 
Directions, Rural Strategy Background Paper # 9,
 Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 
 
Baker, Christopher John.  1984
.  An Indian Rural Economy, 1880-1955: The Tamilnad 
Countryside.  Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
 
Berdegue,J.A., T. Reardon, G. Escobar. 2000. ﬁRur
al Non-farm Income and Employment in Latin 
America and the Caribbeanﬂ, paper presented duri
ng the conference on Development of the Rural 
Economy and Poverty Reduction in Latin Americ
a and the Caribbean, New Orleans, March 24, 2000.   

 
Brewer, J. et al. 1999.  
Irrigation Management Transfer in India :  Policies, Processes and 
Performance. New Delhi:  Oxford. 
 
Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion. 1998. ﬁF
arm productivity and rural poverty in India,ﬂ
  Journal of Development Studies
. No. 34 (April).  Deaton, A. and J. Dreze, 2002.  ﬁPoverty and Inequality in India, A Re-Examination,ﬂ 
Economic 
and Political Weekly
, September 2002, pp. 3729-48. 
 Deininger, K., D. Umali-Deininger, and A. Trita
h. 2003. ﬁTargetted Public Distribution System: 
Is it Reaching the Poor,ﬂ draft mimeo. 

 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002a. 
Statistical Handbook of Tamil Nadu, 2001
. Chennai:  
Comissioner Department of Economics and Statistics 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu.  2002b.  
Agrostat 2001
.  Chennai: Commissioner of Agriculture. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002c.  
Policy Note 2002-03 (Demand No. 12).
 Chennai:  
Department of Cooperation, F
ood and Consumer Protection.. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2002d.  
Season and Crop Report, 2000-01
.Chennai:  Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics 

 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001. 
Tamil Nadu-An Economic Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  
Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001a. ﬁChapter 5:  Irrigation,ﬂ in  
Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001b. ﬁC
hapter 3:  Agriculture,ﬂ in  
Tamil Nadu-An Economic 
Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and Applied Research. 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu. 2001c. ﬁChapter 4:  Animal Husbandry, Fishery and Forestry,ﬂ in  

Tamil Nadu-An Economic Appraisal 1999-2000
. Chennai:  Department of Evaluation and 
Applied Research. 
    75Gulati, Ashok and Sudha Narayanan.  2003. 
The Subsidy Syndrome in
 Indian Agriculture.  New Delhi: Oxford University Press.   
 Hazell, P.B.R. and C. Ramasamy (eds.). 1991.  
The Green Revolution Reconsidered: The Impact 
of High-Yielding Rice Varieties in South India
.  Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Kerr, John, Ganesh Pangare and Vasudha Lokur Pangare. 2002.  
Watershed Development 
Projects in India: An Evaluation
.  International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) Research 
Report 127.  Washington D.C.: IFPRI.   
 Lanjouw, Peter, Rajshri Jaya
raman and Yoko Kijima. 2003. 
Tamil Nadu Poverty Note: Poverty in 
the 1990s, A Preliminary Profile and Emerging Issues
.  World Bank (unpublished background 
paper).   
 Monari, Lucio. 2003. Power Supply to Agriculture.  Background note for India Agricultural 
Policy Review (mimeo).   

 
National Dairy Development Board. 2002. 
Annual Report 2000/01.
   National Sample Survey Organization.  National Sample Survey 54
th round (1998).  Data files.   
 Palanismai, K. 2002.  
Rationalization of Water Charges in Tamil Nadu
. Final Report to the Water 
Services Charges Committee. Mimeo. 

 Palanismai, K. 2003.  Irrigation Deve
lopment in Tamil Nadu. Mimeo. 
 Raveendaran, N. 1994.  
Consultancy Project on Marketing Pr
actices of Paddy and their Fiscal and Production Impact
.  Department of Agricultural Economics, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University.  Coimbatore.  (processed).   
 Rajagopalan, V.  2000. 
Problems and Prospects of Agricultural Development in Tamil Nadu.  Occasional Paper 13.  Mumbai: National Bank fo
r Agriculture and Rural Development.   
 Ramasamy, C. et al.  2003.  
Promoting Agricultural Developmen
t in Tamil Nadu: Perspectives, 
Dimensions and Potentials
.  (unpublished background paper by a team led by Prof. C. 
Ramasamy, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University).   
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU).  Crop Survey. 2001 (data files). 

 
van Koppen, B.,  R. Parthasarathy and C. Safiliou. 2003. 
Pro-Poor Irrigation Management 
Transfer. Water Policy Briefing Issue. 6. IWMI-Tata Water Policy Program. 
 
World Bank. 2004a. 
India Re-energizing the Agricultural Sector
, South Asia Rural Development 
Unit, Draft Report. 
 
-----------. 2004b.  
Agriculture Investment Sourcebook. 
Agriculture and Rural Development 
Department.  -----------. 2003a, The Incidence of Canal Irrigation Subsidies in India, A Policy Note
, South Asia 
Rural Development Unit, processed. 

    76----------. 2003b, Revitalizing Punjab™s Agriculture
, Policy Note, South Asia Rural Development, 
processed.  -----------.2003c. Promoting Agro-Enterprise and Agro-Food Systems Development in Developing 
and Transition Countries, Towards and Operational Strategy for the World Bank Group
, Report 26032, Washington: World Bank. 
 
------------.2003d. India Promoting Agricultural Growth in Maharashtra,
 Report No. 25415-IN, 
Washington, D.C.: South Asia Rural Development Unit, World Bank. 
 ----------.2001. India Power Supply to Agriculture, Report No. 22171-IN, Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank 
 
   
 
   4141

                The ploughers are the linch-pin of the world;              they bear Them up who other works perform, 
             too weak its toils to share.                                                                                     - Thirukkural 1032                                                                          
3.1 
 
AGRICULTURE
IntroductionAgriculture is a critical sector in the 
Indian economy.  Achieving a 8.2 percent of growth in the overall GSDP may not deliver 
much in terms of poverty reduction unless 
agricultural growth accelerates.  At the 

same time, ‚growth with inclusiveness™ can 

be achieved only when agricultural growth 

accelerates and is also distributed amongst 

the people and regions.  Agriculture has to 
be kept at the centre of any reform agenda 
or planning process, in order to make a 


and to ensure long-term food security of the 
people.Tamil Nadu has about 5.96 percent 
of Nation™s population, occupies 4 percent 

of the land area and has 3 percent of the 
water resources of the Nation.  In the State, 
agriculture provides livelihood to about 40 

percent of the population.  Hence, the State™s 
economy swirls around agriculture and allied 

sectors.  Therefore, any disturbance in the 



the State™s overall growth rate, ultimately 
leading to deceleration in its economic growth.  

Realizing agriculture sector™s importance, the 

Government of Tamil Nadu is taking all out 

efforts to usher in Second Green Revolution so 
as to enhance the farmers™ income by 2-3 times 
from the present level through appropriate 

land use, farm level planning through Farm 
Crop Management System (FCMS), moisture 



secondary agriculture, value addition and 

facilitated marketing.An Average Annual Growth Rate 
(AAGR) of 5.1 percent is envisaged for 
agriculture sector in Vision Tamil Nadu 

by 2023 and to achieve this target, the key 



promotion of market driven agricultural 
produce, b) accelerating innovation and 

extension mechanism, c) functional 
consolidation of land holdings, d) emphasis 

on mechanization, e) improving productivity, 

f) assurance of timely irrigation, g) creating 

robust supply chain and h) skill development 

in agriculture. Towards the infrastructure 
4141

                The ploughers are the linch-pin of the world;              they bear Them up who other works perform, 
             too weak its toils to share.                                                                                     - Thirukkural 1032                                                                          
3.1 
 
AGRICULTURE
IntroductionAgriculture is a critical sector in the 
Indian economy.  Achieving a 8.2 percent of growth in the overall GSDP may not deliver 
much in terms of poverty reduction unless 
agricultural growth accelerates.  At the 

same time, ‚growth with inclusiveness™ can 

be achieved only when agricultural growth 

accelerates and is also distributed amongst 

the people and regions.  Agriculture has to 
be kept at the centre of any reform agenda 
or planning process, in order to make a 


and to ensure long-term food security of the 
people.Tamil Nadu has about 5.96 percent 
of Nation™s population, occupies 4 percent 

of the land area and has 3 percent of the 
water resources of the Nation.  In the State, 
agriculture provides livelihood to about 40 

percent of the population.  Hence, the State™s 
economy swirls around agriculture and allied 

sectors.  Therefore, any disturbance in the 



the State™s overall growth rate, ultimately 
leading to deceleration in its economic growth.  

Realizing agriculture sector™s importance, the 

Government of Tamil Nadu is taking all out 

efforts to usher in Second Green Revolution so 
as to enhance the farmers™ income by 2-3 times 
from the present level through appropriate 

land use, farm level planning through Farm 
Crop Management System (FCMS), moisture 



secondary agriculture, value addition and 

facilitated marketing.An Average Annual Growth Rate 
(AAGR) of 5.1 percent is envisaged for 
agriculture sector in Vision Tamil Nadu 

by 2023 and to achieve this target, the key 



promotion of market driven agricultural 
produce, b) accelerating innovation and 

extension mechanism, c) functional 
consolidation of land holdings, d) emphasis 

on mechanization, e) improving productivity, 

f) assurance of timely irrigation, g) creating 

robust supply chain and h) skill development 

in agriculture. Towards the infrastructure 
42development in agriculture, `40,000 crore has been proposed in the Vision Tamil Nadu 
2023.Tamil Nadu performs well  in the all India scenario in productivity of major 
food crops.  It ranked (2009-10) second 
in productivity of rice next to Punjab. 
(Agricultural Statistics at a Glance, 2011, 



case of maize and oilseeds productivity.  The 


productivity surpassing Karnataka and 

Gujarat.  Similarly, in productivity of 

sugarcane, it is the Numero Uno State and 

its productivity is nearly 45 percent more 
than the National average.  In the case of 

vegetables and fruits productivity, it ranked 



level.The issues and challenges of 
the agricultural sector is complex. The 

productivity has stagnated in the recent years 


b) depleting water resources, c) escalating 

inputs costs, d) increased incidence of 



health as a consequence of indiscriminate 

use of chemical inputs, f) low level of post 
harvest technology, g) uncertain market 

prospects, and h) relatively higher incidence 

of indebtedness of farmers (Swaminathan, 
2010). In addition to the above, marginalization 
of land holdings, high variability in rainfall 

distribution, pressure of expanding habitat 

intruding into farm space, inadequate capital 

formation by the public sector and declining 
public investment in agriculture affect the 

agricultural performance in the State.  Salient Features of AgricultureThe salient features of Tamil Nadu's 




present concentration of cultivation from 

water intensive crops like rice and sugarcane 

to more nutritious but less water consuming 

crops like pulses, millets, oilseeds and so 

on in terms of total irrigated land and b) 

predominance of small and marginal farmers 
in overall agriculture production. Dominance of Small and Marginal 
FarmersThe distribution of landholding is 
skewed towards small and marginal farmers 
and the average size of holding is low.  The 

semi-medium, medium and large farmers 

accounted for a small proportion (9 percent) 

of the holdings but operating a higher 

proportion (41 percent) of the total area.  The 

average size of holding was higher in the 
case of large farmers (20.59 ha.) followed 

by medium farmers (5.61 ha).  The overall 
average size of land holding had come down 

from 0.83 ha. in 2005-06 to 0.80 ha. in 2010-

11. (Graph 3.1.1). Graph 3.1.1: Land Holding Pattern in Tamil Nadu (in Lakh Nos) Source : Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTNThe reduction in land holding size in 
Tamil Nadu directly affects the productivity 

as the farmer would not be able to afford 
the investments required for technological 
improvements. Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 

envisages functional consolidation of holdings 

through cooperative farming, contract farming 

and other mechanisms such as farmer 

groups and joint liability groups and implies 

the urgent need to increase the penetration 

of modern agricultural technologies and 

improve output.62.66 (77%)
11.82, (15%)
5.02 (6%)
1.51, (2%)
0.17(0.2%)
Marginal
Small
Semi Medium
Medium
Large
4343Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTN Declining Net Cultivated AreaRapid urbanization and related factors 

area in the State. An analysis of time series 

data on net cultivated area and land put to 

non-agricultural uses in the State clearly 

reveals the above fact. (Graph. 3.1.2)  Land 
put to non-agricultural purposes increased 

from 9.8 percent in 1950s to 14.56 percent in  

1990s and reached 16.17 percent in 2000s, 

which is mainly due to urbanization and 
industrialization.  The trend in decrease in 

net area sown was analyzed and the net area 
sown came down from 56.38 Lakh hectares 
(L.ha) in 1950s to 50.22 L.ha. in 2000s though 

it had registered some increase during the 

mid 60s and 70s.  The main challenges faced 


deterioration in soil health due to depletion 
of top soil and decline in organic content, 

marginalization of landholdings, dwindling 

ground water resources, shortage of labour 

force, declining cropping intensity and poor 

adoption of crop management practices.  The 
Twelfth Five Year Plan will make efforts to 

address these issues by bringing back the 
fallow lands under cultivation of oilseeds, 

pulses and millets.Review of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan PerformanceMany initiatives were undertaken during the Eleventh Five Year Plan apart from implementing various schemes.  As 
against the outlay of 
`2885.90 crore for Crop 

Husbandry sector, an amount of 
`3063.04 crore was spent (106 percent). The actual 
expenditure is much more under Government 

of India and World Bank projects.  The 

expenditure is higher than the outlay due to 
the implementation of National Agricultural 
Development Programme (NADP), National 

Food Security Mission (NFSM), Integrated 

Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and 

Maize (ISOPOM), Crop Insurance Schemes, 

Seeds Multiplication Scheme of paddy, 

millets, pulses, oilseeds and cotton and 

World Bank assisted Tamil Nadu Irrigated 

Agriculture Modernization and Waterbodies 

Restoration and Management Project (TN 

IAMWARM) etc.For effective delivery of quality 
inputs and extension services, additional 

initiatives such as establishment of 18 Seed 

Testing Laboratories, nine new Bio Fertilizer 

Production Labs in addition to six existing 

units, 11 Soil Testing Laboratories, Agri Clinic 

cum Mini Soil Testing Laboratories at one per 

block, Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) for 

medium range weather forecast in 224 blocks 

and 79 seed storage godowns to store 79,000 


Further, Agriculture Information Service 

Network (AGRISNET) was developed as an 

Information, Communication and Technology  



information by restructuring the whole State 
Graph 3.1.2: Shrinking Net Area Sown0102030405060701950-511953-541956-571959-601962-631965-661968-691971-721974-751977-781980-811983-841986-871989-901993-931995-961998-992001-022004-052007-082010-11non
-agri.use
Netarea sown
44extension system and bringing the entire line 
departments under one umbrella. Agricultural Growth during the 
Eleventh Five Year PlanIn the Eleventh Plan, a target of 4 percent growth rate in agriculture and allied 


plan period (2007-08 & 2008-09), a negative 
growth rate of 4.69 percent and 2.70 percent 
respectively was observed in the Agriculture 

(including livestock sector).  (Table 3.1.1).Table 3.1.1: Growth rate of Agriculture & Allied Activities and Agriculture (2004-05 prices) (in percentage) YearAgriculture 
and allied activitiesAgriculture2007-08
2008-09
2009-10 (RE)
2010-11(QE)
2011-12 (AE)-4.41
-2.296.14
4.54
7.08-4.46
-2.706.31
4.20
7.98Average          

(5 Years)2.212.22Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTNThough the growth rate in agriculture 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the average agriculture growth in the Eleventh Five Year 

Plan period registered a positive growth of 

2.22 percent as it recovered in the later years 

due to the favourable conditions in 2010 to 

2012.  The negative growth during 2007-
08 was due to the crop damage caused by 
natural calamities.  In spite of the crop loss 

due to Nisha cyclone, agriculture growth had 

shown recovery during 2008-09, due to many 

initiatives taken by the Government. In 2009-

10, 2010-11 and 2011-12, the agriculture 

sector revived with a positive growth of 6.31 

percent, 4.20 percent and 7.98 percent 



rains in the northeast monsoon, adoption 

of technologies such as System of Rice 


and also a high contribution from the dairy 

sector. However, the growth level continues 

to be less than adequate and well below the 

target set for the State.Area, Production and Productivity 
of Major Crops
Rice 
Rice is the staple food occupying 33 percent of the gross area sown.  Of the total 
rice area, 93 percent is irrigated and balance 

is under rainfed lands mostly under semi-
dry conditions. The normal area under rice 

is 19.32 L. ha and production is 56.63 L.MT.Table 3.1.2: Area, Production and Yield of Major Agricultural CropsYear Area (L. ha)Production (L.MT.)Yield (Kg/ha.)
PaddyMil-
letsFood grainsRiceMil-
letsFood 
grainsRiceMillets
2006-07 (Terminal 
Year of 10th FYP)2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12  (third 
adv.est)19.3117.8919.32
18.46
19.06
20.286.986.997.24
6.53
6.31
8.0531.6630.9731.92
30.34
31.74
37.1666.1150.4051.83
56.65
57.92
75.9613.6213.5717.51
16.35
15.57
24.3182.6465.8271.01
75.04
75.95
103.85342328172682
3070
3039
3746195019412419
2504
2468
3022Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics, GoTN 4545Rice production during the Plan 
increased from 66.11 L.MT (2006-07) to 75.96 
(2011-12) L.MT.  Due to natural calamities, 
rice production in the State was around 

50-52 L.MT during initial years of the Plan.  

Productivity of rice increased from 3423 kg/

ha (2006-07) to 3746 kg/ha. (2011-12). Technical Intervention for Rice 
Production In Tamil Nadu, System of Rice 

introduced in a big way in the year 2007-
08 and efforts were taken to popularize the 

technology and for its adoption over a larger 

area.  In the year 2007-08, 4.21 L.ha. paddy 

area was brought under SRI out of total 

paddy area of 17.89 L.ha. which was only 24 
percent.  Productivity achievement under SRI 

was 4051 kg/ha. increase of 66 percent over 
the conventional method.  With the objective 

of increasing rice production in districts 

wherein potential exists to expand area and 

increase productivity, National Food Security 

Mission (NFSM) is being implemented in 

Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, 

Ramanathapuram and Sivagangai districts.  

Implementation of Seed Multiplication /Seed 

Village schemes has resulted in increased 

seed replacement rate to 68 percent against 


of India.MilletsThe main reasons for drastic 
reduction of area under millets over the 



wheat, less returns to farmers, absence of 

added economic value based food items, 

changing lifestyle of the people, mismatch 

between minimum support price and cost 

of cultivation, less area under irrigation and 

cultivation of local varieties.Millets occupy 11 percent of the 
gross area sown and the major millets 
cultivated are Cholam, Cumbu, Maize and 

Ragi.  Normal area under millets is 7.07 L.ha 

and production is 15.57 L.MT. Technical 

interventions such as adoption of millet based 
cropping system, use of hybrids, precision 

farming and implementation of schemes 

such as procurement and distribution of 

millet seeds, ISOPOM-Maize, NADP and 

Seed Village scheme brought in substantial 

improvement in productivity and production. 



production from 13.62 L.MT to 24.31 L.MT 
and productivity enhanced from 1950 kg/

ha to 3022 kg/ha. during the Eleventh 

Five Year Plan period. Maize, being a highly 

remunerative crop also paved the way for 
shift in cropping pattern and increase in area 
under millets. Area under maize registered an 

increase from 1.97 to 3.44 L.ha. production 
increased from 7.59 to 17.81 L.MT and yield 

increased from 3888 to 5176 kg/ha. during 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  Pulses Pulses occupy nearly 11 percent of 
the gross area sown in the state of which 
only 8.73 percent is irrigated.  Normal area 

under pulses is 5.80 L.ha and the normal 
production is 2.24 L.MT. With an objective of 

increasing the production and productivity of 

pulses and bridging the demand Œ supply gap, 
pulses were promoted as pure crop under 

irrigated condition on cluster basis. Suitable 

strategies were adopted in rice fallow pulses 

and rainfed areas under NFSM.  Similarly, 
foliar spraying of 2 percent DAP from 2007-08, 



2010-11 under NADP and implementation 

of Accelerated Pulses Production Programme 

(A3P) from 2010-11 with an objective to 

bring a compact area of 1000 hectares per 
unit purely under pulses helped the State to 

increase pulses production.Food grains 
The area and production of food 
grains registered an increase from 31.66 L.ha 

to 37.16 L.ha and 82.64 L.MT to 103.85 L.MT 
respectively during the Eleventh Five Year 



programmes such as NFSM, A3P and NADP 
led to considerable increase in the area and 
production of food grains. 46Cotton 
Cotton occupies nearly 2 percent 
of the gross area sown.  The normal area 
under cotton is 1.09 L.ha. with a production 

of 2.24 lakh bales (170 kg lint each).  With 

an objective to increase the production 

and productivity of cotton, schemes viz., 

procurement and distribution of cotton seeds, 

Technology Mini Mission-II for cotton, NADP 

and increasing production of cotton using 

growth promoter-Naphthalene Acetic Acid 
(NAA), TNAU cotton plus and micronutrient 

mixture were implemented in the State. 

The major technological interventions like 
adoption of precision farming, micro irrigation 

systems such as drip and sprinklers at 
subsidized cost motivated cotton growers to 

take up cultivation extensively. The area and 
production increased from 1.00 L.ha to 1.45 
L.ha. and from 2.21 L.bales to 3.78 L.bales 
respectively during the Eleventh Five Year 

Plan period. Sugarcane 
Sugarcane is a major irrigated crop of 
the State next to rice which plays a vital role 

in the State™s economy.  It is a high water 

and labour intensive crop occupying 5.5 

percent of the gross area sown. The normal 

area, production and productivity of the crop 
is 3.38 L. ha. 375.23 L.MT and 108 MT (cane) 
per ha respectively.  In the year 2011-12, the 

area, production and productivity were 3.82 

L. ha. 393.67 L. MT and 108 MT (cane) per 

ha. respectively.Oilseeds 

productivity of oilseeds in the country.  

Oilseeds occupy 7.7 percent of the gross area 

sown.  Major oilseeds grown in Tamil Nadu are 


The normal area under oilseeds was 5.56 

L.ha. of which groundnut occupies 4.75 L.ha. 

The normal production of oilseeds is 11.13 

L.MT. Normal production and productivity of 

groundnut are 9.93 L.MT and 2323 kg per 
 ha. respectively.During 2007-08, almost all the 
districts witnessed low productivity and the 

State recorded 1747 kg per ha. from an area 

of 6.59 L.ha. resulting in production of 11.52 
L.MT.  In the succeeding years, even though 

the area declined substantially, productivity 

in most of the districts was found to be higher 

with reference to the State average.  During 

the Eleventh Five Year Plan, components 

such as procurement and distribution of 

quality seeds, combined nutrient spray 

under ISOPOM, micro irrigation and gypsum 

distribution for groundnut under NADP 



were recorded. There was a 48 percent yield 

increase with water saving to an extent 
of 30-40 percent and higher oil content 

was recorded under precision farming.  

Factors attributed for steady increase in the 


seeds, b) promotion of micro irrigation in a 

larger extent, c) encouragement of farmers 

by the adoption of seed village scheme and 

d) Integrated Nutrient and Pest Management 

(INPM).HorticultureMajor initiatives taken during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan for increasing the 
area coverage and productivity were precision 

farming, micro irrigation and fertigation, 

protected cultivation, rejuvenation of old 

orchards, organic farming, hi-density 

planting and canopy management.4747During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, 
the State schemes viz., the Integrated 
Horticulture Development Scheme -IHDS 
(`29.84 crore), Integrated Tribal Development 
Programme - ITDP (
`2 crore), Western Ghats 

Development Project (WGDP) and Hill Area 

Development Programme (HADP) (
`12.38 
crore) and NADP (
`182.45 crore) were 

implemented.  The Government of India 

shared schemes like National Horticulture 
Mission -NHM (
`565.43 crore), Micro 
Irrigation (
`353.34 crore), National Bamboo 
Mission ŒNBM (
`4.28 crore), National Mission 

on Medicinal plants (
`21.72 crore) were 

implemented. The State also implemented 

the World Bank assisted IAMWARM project 

(`42 crore).  Under precision farming, an 

extent of 22294 ha was brought and 1238 
clusters were established during 2008-11.  

During Eleventh Five Year Plan period, an 
area of 72531 ha. was covered under micro 

irrigation.National Horticulture Mission 
(NHM)National Horticulture Mission is 



The scheme is implemented on a mission 
mode from 2005-06 and aims at holistic 

development of horticulture with focus 

on expansion of area under high income 
generating horticulture crops.  The scheme 

is implemented in 22 districts.  Components 



high value horticulture crops, b) production 

of planting materials, c) rejuvenation of 

old orchards, d) canopy management, e) 

protected cultivation, f) organic farming, g) 

mechanization, h) post harvest management, 

i) creation of marketing infrastructure and j) 

human resources development.    Table 3.1.3: Area, Production and Yield of Horticultural CropsYearArea(L ha.)Production (L MT)Productivity (Tonnes/ha.)
FruitsVeg
Spice and Cond.Plantation
cropsFruitsVeg
Spices and Cond.Plant 
cropsFruitsVeg
Spices and Cond.Plant 
crops2006-07 
(Terminal 
Year of 
10th FYP)3.772.381.482.3369.4073.518.027.9225.8030.385.653.40
2007-083.862.391.452.3167.7876.617.397.9824.2131.405.28
3.452008-093.882.241.462.4668.0371.868.639.8523.0628.525.604.00
2009-103.902.841.442.3063.2758.728.0410.1821.7126.225.774.42
2010-11 
(P)3.902.271.522.6579.6583.879.3511.4724.8930.725.664.31
2011-12 
(esti-
mated)3.322.841.732.7585.3590.5210.8711.9925.6931.876.284.36
Source: Dept. of Economics and Statistics and Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN48Performance of Access to Inputs 
SeedsSeed  availability  and  Seed  Replacement 
Rate (SRR) remained inadequate and below 
 the desired levels, thereby hindering 
production.  There was also a mismatch in the 
demand for and supply of seeds of different 

varieties.  The desirable SRR is around 33 

percent for self-pollinated crops like paddy, 

ragi, pulses, groundnut, gingelly etc, 50 
percent for cross-pollinated crops such as 

cholam, cumbu and cotton and 100 percent 

for hybrids.  The present SRR of all the crops 

is higher except for pulses and oilseeds.  The 

SRR achieved during 2011-12 was 68 percent 

for paddy, 55 percent for millets, 20 percent 

for pulses, 15 percent for oilseeds and 100 

percent for cotton.  The Government is taking 

various steps to ensure the availability of 

quality seeds to the farming community. The 
SRR during 2011-12 is shown in the Table 

3.1.4.Table 3.1.4: Seed Replacement Rate of Major Agricultural Crops Œ 2011-12S. No.Crop
Total requirement(in tonnes)Dept.-C seeds(in tonnes)Private-C /TFL seeds. (in tonnes)SRR achieved(percent)12
3
4
5Paddy
Millets
Pulses
Oilseeds
Cotton11000012153
24000
80652555180004504500
6376100572506243300571645568
55
20
15100Source: Policy note-2011-12 of Agriculture Department, GoTNAs against the target of 2.24 L.ha. to 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, an area of 2.47 
L.ha. was registered and a quantity of 3.91 

L.MT (as against the target of 4.02 L.MT) 

Organic Certification
assure quality of organic products and aims at 
regulating and facilitating the sale of organic 



Department (TNOCD) was established in the 

year 2007-08 to carry out inspection and 



in accordance with National Programme for 

Organic Production (NPOP). TNOCD has been 

accredited by Agricultural and Processed Food 

Products Exports Development Authority 

(APEDA), New Delhi. The Department imparts 

free training to registered organic farmers on 
NPOP and TNOCD standards. During the 

year 2007-08, 5244 acres were registered 


considerably in the last four years and 28115 

acres have been registered under organic 





organic seed production through local seed 

banks, production of bio inputs as a part of 
fertilizer and pesticide production, facilitation 

of transition from chemical to organic farming 
through a government programme, strict 

protection to organic farms, dissemination of 



for organic produce.FertilizersNeed based application of fertilizers is 
recommended to get maximum productivity and any excess or inadequate application will 
result in lower productivity. As against the 

distribution target of 50.75 L.MT for inorganic 
fertilizers, 36.76 L.MT have been distributed 



Five Year Plan.  In case of Blue Green Algae 
4949(BGA), as against the target of 2.65 L.MT 
only 1.57 L.MT have been produced and 
distributed to the farmers during the same 
period.  Per hectare consumption of fertilizer 
in the state has increased from 40 kg per 
ha in 1970-71 to 194 kg per ha. in 2007-08 
(nearly 5 fold increase).   The Government of 
India has announced the policy of grant on 

Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) and in this 

context, awareness creation on the use of 
need based optimal application of fertilizers 

and Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) is 

a must and needs to be scaled up.    Pesticides Nearly 20 percent production loss has been estimated due to pests and 
disease incidence and to prevent such 

loss, a perfect monitoring is essential. 

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is being 

popularized extensively.  By this, the State™s 
consumption of technical grade pesticides 

which was 10,926 MT during 1984-85 has 
now been brought down to 2,335 MT.  Apart 
from this, the use of bio-pesticides and bio 

control agents were encouraged. Localized 

production of these bio-pesticides needs to 

be encouraged and support facilities to be 



technical knowledge transfers. Agricultural Mechanisation            At present (2011-12), 94 bull 
dozers, 165 tractors, 31 combine harvesters 
and 2 hydraulic excavators are hired out to 

farmers through the Agricultural Engineering 

Department (AED).  The available machinery 

in the AED is not adequate to meet the 

requirement of the farmers. During the 

Eleventh Five Year Plan under NADP, 50 
percent subsidy assistance to the tune 

of `162.20 crore was given to farmers 
for promotion of agricultural machinery 

and 7807 power tillers, 3414 rotovators, 

987 paddy transplanters, 765 paddy 

combine harvesters and 48,144 numbers of 

agricultural machinery / implements were 

procured.  Also, under the centrally sponsored 


Mode Programme, agricultural machinery/ 
implements were popularized among the 

farming community so as to supplement the 

available farm power, to meet out shortage of 
agricultural labourers, to ensure timeliness 

in carrying out various farm operations and 
to increase agricultural production.  Subsidy 

assistance was given to farmers to the tune 
of `38.15 crore which includes the State 
share of `3.81 crore to procure 1072 tractors, 
7730 power tillers, 1535 rotovators and 572 

agricultural implements.Scheme for Replacing Old Pumpsets 
with New Efficient Pumpsets
pumpsets is poor as the farmers are using 

poor discharge compared to their rated 

horsepower. In order to overcome these 

setbacks and with an aim to save electricity, 

subsidy assistance was provided to farmers 

for replacing their old pumpsets and 

renewal of electrical accessories. During the 

Eleventh Five Year Plan, this programme was 

implemented to replace 45778 old pumpsets 



subsidy of `30.66 crore. Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017)Strategy
Revitalizing Agriculture 
Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 envisages that 
infrastructure development in agriculture are 

a) improving the productivity in agriculture, 

b) assurance of year round irrigation and 

c) marketing extension. With this in view, 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan has focused on 
strategies to achieve an AAGR of 5.0 percent 

in agriculture and allied sector. The hiatus in agriculture is mainly 
due to deteriorating soil health, declining 

water resources, inadequate investment in 

rural infrastructure, inadequate research 50& development activities and spiraling 
prices of inputs, change in the mindsets of 

people viewing agriculture as of low value.  

To break this hiatus, the government is 
actively formulating farmer/farm oriented, 



with adequate investment in developing 

rural infrastructure to augment agricultural 
production.Farmers are motivated to adopt 
professional approach in agriculture by 

measures such as bringing fallow lands 

under cultivation, adoption of two-pronged 

approach to obtain high productivity by 

identifying districts having large cropped area 

but less productivity and districts having 

high productivity but less cropped area, 



high productivity, promotion of zonewise 



adoption of frontier production technologies 

are proposed.  In addition to this, multiple 

concession to agro based industries and 

nutritional security through Nutri-cereals 
Promotion Programme will be encouraged.The major strategies to spur 
SECOND GREEN REVOLUTION are:

Improved Pulses production technologies 



as Whole Village Concept, Sustainable 

Sugarcane Initiatives (SSI) and Precision 

Farming for agricultural and horticultural 

crops are proposed to bridge the yield gap. 
infrastructure and promoting primary 
producer owned agri business ventures.
diversifying the cultivation in favour of 
high value, organic horticulture and 
commercial crops while ensuring food and 
nutritional security for all.
- Assessing the requirement of agricultural 
inputs by conduct of meeting at village panchayat level and bottom up planning 

will be given priority so as to meet the 

local needs effectively and ensuring 

availability of adequate quantity of inputs 

in appropriate time and that are to be 

locally produced.
saline and alkaline soil, issue of Farmers™ 

Integrated Handbooks (FIHB).


use of irrigation water Œ Promoting 

horticulture technologies and micro 

irrigation as whole village concept.
services to all farm families in Tamil 

Nadu-Farm level interventions for 'end-

to-end' involvement of extension staff with 
individual farmer Œ Conducting pre season 
village campaigns (Uzhavar Peruvizha) 
in close coordination with the all allied 

sectors.
and agriculture innovation and excellence 
by the farmers
as  power /cono weeders and markersIn Tamil Nadu, agricultural operations 
are constrained by sub-optimal water 

resources to a great extent.  To ensure ﬁmore 

crop/income per drop of waterﬂ, special 

emphasis will be given for the cultivation of 

high value Œ less water intensive crops for 

effective land use system.
be increased by enhancing productivity of 

per unit of water for which strategies such 

as mass adoption of Micro Irrigation Mission  

approach, promotion of Precision Farming, 

SSI, SRI and Rainwater Harvesting structures 

for recharging groundwater are proposed.LandThe conversion of lands for various 
purposes has to be regulated and at the same 5151time it cannot be entirely dispensed with, as rapid growth is possible only if agriculture 
and other activities go hand in hand.  The 

Union Planning Commission highlights the 

decline in net area sown due to diversion 

of agricultural lands for urbanization and 

industrialization purposes. It has also 

suggested that reasonable restrictions on 

acquisition of multi-crop irrigated land should 

be laid and wherever net area sown is less 
than 50 percent of total geographical area, 

the State concerned should necessarily set 

a cap on cultivable area to be acquired. The 
Government of Tamil Nadu has passed an Act 

prohibiting unnecessary and unwarranted 

diversion of agricultural lands to other 

purposes wherein District Collector has been 

authorized to impose restrictions in case 



Similar to forest land conversions, strategies 

may be adopted to ensure optimal land usage 

to protect food and nutritional security.Following are the initiatives that have 
been contemplated to achieve the goals set 
in the Twelfth Five Year Plan to overcome the 

The ongoing schemes such as National 
Agricultural Development Programme, 

National Food Security Mission, National 

Horticulture Mission, Procurement and 

Distribution of paddy, millets and pulses, 

Crop Insurance including Weather Based 

Insurance Scheme, Oilseeds Production 

Programme, Horticulture Development 
Programme will be continued during the 

Twelfth Five Year Plan. However, in view of 

the increased importance being given to the 
enhancing agricultural growth and farm 

income, a set of new schemes will be initiated 

to achieve the targeted growth of the Twelfth 

Five Year Plan.New InitiativesFarm Level PlanningWith the objective of increasing the income of small and marginal farmers by 2-3 times from 
the present level, it is proposed to increase 

the cropping intensity, irrigation intensity, 

productivity by 50 percent and above and  

bringing fallow lands under cultivation. The 

Government has taken initiatives to ensure 





ensure sustainable agricultural production, 

the Department of Agriculture has envisaged 

farm level interventions through   ﬁFarm 

level planningﬂ.  The prime objectives 

are to enable farmers to adopt improved 

cultivation methodology and techniques 

in  their landholding, to provide linkages 

and easy access to critical inputs in time, 

enable farmers to use most appropriate farm 
machinery to reduce drudgery, labour cost 

and get higher production and productivity, 

to empower farmers with complete access 

to the information related to his farming 
operations, extension functionaries to become 

a friend and guide of farmers throughout 

the cultivation cycle.  To achieve the above 

objectives, the following activities are to be 



irrigation status.
every farm.
at village, block and district level through 

ISMS. Online input monitoring system in 
the Agricultural Extension Centres along 
52with customized billing has also been proposed.
to match the inputs supply with demand 
by sharing continuously the available 
information among the stakeholders 

through internet on AGRISNET portal.
farm at critical stages; make bio metric 

observations with still photos and video 

clippings. 
on the assessment of production to get 
remunerative prices for the produce.   Farm Crop Management 
System(FCMS) Integrated Farming System (IFS)The threefold increase in farmer™s income will be possible with farm level 
interventions by adopting Integrated Farming 

System (IFS) approach. So far, the extension 

efforts were generic by increasing the 

production through intensive cultivation. It is 

imperative for farmers to adopt agricultural 

production with horticulture, animal 


Farming Systems Approach. Based on the 

resources available, a farm based plan needs 

to be developed for harnessing the synergy 

among the enterprises which will ultimately 

provide a higher income. So far, no such plan 

was formulated by the extension system. With 

this in view, during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, 

it is proposed to take up activities such as 

collection of basic data on allied enterprises, 

categorizing the villages based on the micro 
climatic conditions, development of crop 

plans in relation to soil type, irrigation and 

rainfall and integrating with other enterprises 



net income, facilitation for timely availability 

of inputs, credit, insurance, farm machinery 

besides technologies, periodical monitoring 

by extension functionaries for corrective 
measures in scheme implementation, 
providing market intelligence and instant 
expert advice on farm related issues. 

Considering this, an Integrated Farming 

System Model Village will be organized in all 

blocks.As an ICT initiative, the basic 
information along with the farm resource 

inventory is maintained in Farmer Database 

of AGRISNET portal. Mostly this information 

is relevant to the agricultural sector alone 
and now it has been planned to maintain 

information about other enterprises too.  

Further it has been planned to provide 

information to farmers through Personal 

Digital Assistants (PDAs), Touch Screen 

Kiosks, SMS gateway etc. Soil Health Management - Farmer™s 
Integrated Hand Book (FIHB)Soil samples from all the 81.13 
lakh farm holdings will be collected and 
analysed for macro and micro nutrients with 


pattern. The data will be digitized and linked 

to AGRISNET Portal for easy retrieval.As a part of farm level interventions, it 
is proposed to distribute Farmer™s Integrated 

Hand Book, a fool proof record containing 

the personal information of farmers, soil 

test results, nutrient recommendations and 



for three years. This is being distributed 
to farmers to guide them in applying 

appropriate fertilizers and also to keep a 

record of farm wise/season wise production 

and productivity. FIHB empowers farmers to 

draw their own cropping programme, input 


Ensuring Quality Inputs Œ Input 
Supply Management System (ISMS)Efforts taken to ensure the availability 
of quality prime inputs like seeds, fertilizers, 
micro nutrients, bio-fertilisers, plant 

protection chemicals, credit, etc., to the 

farmers and to enable them to take up various 

cultivation activities in the appropriate 



assessed and made available in time by 

creating additional capacity with modern 
5353machinery and strengthening existing Seed 
Processing Units (SPUs). ii) Establishment 

of local seed banks, iii) Fertilizers Œ required 

quantity of fertilizers to be stocked in Primary 

Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societies 
(PACCS) and private and localized production 

of bio fertilizers to be facilitated and iv) 

Credit requirement of the farmers assessed 

and arranged through cooperatives and 

nationalized banks.Extension with Renewed Vigour 
by Extensive Use of Information 

TechnologyPresent day agriculture is technology 
propelled and so extension coupled with 
information technology is pivotal for 

transforming agriculture into information 
packed genre to enable farmers in accessing 

innovative technologies for which the 

all farm families by Farmer Database 
Management System (FDMS) through 
mobile application.
functionaries enabled with General Packet 

Radio Service (GPRS), Geo Information 

System (GIS), Global Positioning System 

(GPS) and Pico mini projector for 
implementation of Farm Crop Management 

System (FCMS).
dissemination and farmer™s data updation 
through Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
block level - empowering farmers to 
have an access for information on input 

availability, agriculture technology, 

market information apart from farm plan.
services to all farm families in Tamil Nadu.

enriching the awareness level of farmers 
on farm technologies. Considering the 



the existing Community Radio Station 

functioning at Coimbatore, it is proposed 
to establish 28 Community Radio Stations 
in the TNAU - Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVK).
Reckoner Hand book and pocket book. 
Eight types of farmers guide booklet 
covering food grains, commercial crops, 

annual and perennial horticultural crops, 

soil and water conservation, agricultural 

marketing, technologies of TNAU and 

watershed programmes have been 
prepared.
input distribution and testing of soil 
samples through agri-clinics.
will act as a platform for information 

dissemination between farmers, farmers 
groups and extension functionaries and 


problems related to agriculture and sister 
departments at one spot.
to achieve the targets set below in the Table 3.1.5.54Table 3.1.5: Twelfth Plan Targets Œ Agriculture and Horticulture CropsS. No.CropArea (L.ha)Production (L.MT)Productivity (kg./ha.)
2010-11 
(base)2016-172010-11
(base)2016-172010-11
(base)2016-
17123
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
121314
15Paddy/ Rice-
Conventional
Rice- SRI
Total-Rice
Millets
Pulses
Food grains
Cotton
Sugarcane
Oilseeds
Fruits
Vegetables
Spices & Condi-

ments
Plantation crops
Medicinal Plant
Flowers10.568.5019.066.31
6.3731.741.21
3.16
4.48
3.90
2.26
1.662.650.11
0.315.5016.50
22.00
15.00
12.00
49.001.65
3.73
7.21
4.42
3.79
2.303.670.16
0.4221.8036.1257.92
15.572.4675.952.48342.529.3379.65
83.879.3911.470.61 
3.0020.9779.04100.0160.0010.00170.005.36545.0016.74139.05
145.3617.4819.191.055.18206442503039
24683852393349.00102207824.89
30.725.664.315.55
9.67381347904546
40008343469552.00
146.00232231.46
38.467.605.236.5612.33Source: Dept. of Agriculture & Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTNNote:  Area in terms of Paddy, production and productivity in terms of rice. Productivity of horticulture and plantation crops (fruits, vegetables, spices and condiments, plantation, medicinal plants and 

New Interventions: System of Rice Intensification (SRI) 
Technology as a village conceptIn spite of introduction of SRI 
four years ago, yield gap still exists due to 
non-adoption of all critical technological 

components and this necessitates the 

promotion of SRI as a village concept. Under 

this concept, rice growing villages will be 

selected and promoted on cluster basis to 
ensure perfect adoption of the technology. 

This scheme will be implemented with the 

creation of community nursery; pooling 
and timely provision of resources / inputs 

such as water, seeds, fertilizers including 

bio-fertilizers, plant protection chemicals, 

machinery, etc; conduct of demonstration 


place, convincing the laggards of the same 
village and motivating the farmers of nearby 

villages; minimizing cost of cultivation by 

optimal and localized need based timely 

management of resources to augment 





locations will be attempted. The Government has announced 
prize money and a medal worth `3500 to 
encourage paddy cultivation using SRI 

technology.  Farmers who have cultivated 

paddy in minimum 50 cents of land and 
achieved a yield of more than 2500 kg of 

paddy in an acre are eligible to participate in 

the SRI yield contest.   5555System of Rice Intensification - SuitabilitySynergy of the recommended twelve 
critical steps of SRI, when adopted in toto, 
would lead to considerable increase in rice 

yield. In SRI, alternate wetting and drying is 

an important step to ensure root aeration. 
SRI should not be adopted where soil and 
water conditions are not suitable like low 

lying areas. While SRI adoption has been 

given more emphasis in the Twelfth Plan 
striving to achieve the target of 16.50 L. ha, 

care has to be taken to spread the SRI in the 
suitable areas only. Millets Mission 
In the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it is 
proposed to introduce an Integrated Millets 

Mission through a convergent approach 

by involving Department of Agriculture, 
Department of Civil Supplies and Consumers™ 

Protection as well as Department of 

Agricultural Marketing and Agri Business.   

Farmers all over the State will greatly be 





millets in PDS and creating business 

incubators for millets would help the millet 

farmers to a large extent. Agriculture and 
food production by the small and marginal 

farmers who are vulnerable will be improved 

by introduction of Millets Mission. Box 3.1.1: Snapshot of SPC 
Millets WorkshopState Planning Commission organised a workshop to promote millets 
in the State where the stakeholders 
from Government of India, Government 



Agriculture, Agricultural Marketing, 
Social Welfare, Health, Cooperation and 

Civil Supplies, Horticulture, Animal 

Husbandry, Research Institutions, 
Researchers, Academic Professionals, 
NGOs and Operational Functionaries 

like food processing entrepreneurs, 

farmers also were present.   The major 






concept, increasing area under millets by 

bringing in the fallow lands, incentivisation 

of small entrepreneurs, formation of millet 
clusters and CLGs. While the above will 
address the supply issues with regard to 

millets production, demand also needs to 

be generated by popularization of millets 


addition with millets, popularization of 

millet based nutrient diet and changing 

dietary habits.Source: State Planning Commission, GoTNIndia, despite being one of the 
emerging economies, is ranked as low as 128 
among the malnourished nations; i.e., lower 

than even some of the sub-Saharan African 

countries. A recent study has further indicated 
that almost 20 percent of all diabetes cases in 

India are due to rice consumption. A similar 

study in Tamil Nadu has revealed equal or 

higher incidence of diabetes. This needs 

immediate attention. Introducing millets 

in our diet which was in vogue during our 
ancestral period could resolve this anomaly. 



are way ahead of rice and wheat in terms 
of nutritional content. For instance, millets 

contain 10.6 grams of protein per kilogram, 

as against rice which contains only 6.8 grams.          56
grams to 10.1 grams), minerals (1.9 grams to 

4.4 grams) and calcium (31 mg to 344 mg) in 
comparison to rice. Millets are crops that can 

survive adverse climate change conditions. 

It has been shown that millets can grow in 

conditions of low rainfall requiring as little 

as 300 to 350 mm depending on the type of 

millet and in poor and heavily degraded soils, 

which are the characteristic traits of the arid 
and semi-arid regions of the State. All these 

characteristics make millets the ideal crop for 

the climate crisis that is looming ahead of our 

State. Twelfth Five Year Plan Strategy for 
Millets Production Millets Production EnhancementThe following strategies will be 
implemented during the Twelfth Five Year 

hybrids, local varieties and high yielding 
cultivars, especially for cholam and 

cumbu.  Care will be taken to ensure that 

this does not create new seed monopolies.

irrigation with fertigation to increase input 




utilization of rain water, especially in 

rainfed areas.
soil and moisture conservation through 
supply of dryland machinery at subsidized 
cost.
cost to reduce the cost of cultivation.
pure crop (irrigated condition) by providing 

adequate support mechanism in terms of 
seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, etc.System of Millets Intensification 
To demonstrate the improved 
production and post harvest technology in 

an integrated manner with visible impact 

to catalyze increased production of millets, 




distribution of  scarce indigenous varieties, 

c) supply of critical inputs, d) distribution of 

improved varieties / hybrids as minikit, e)

seed production and sensitizing the farmers 

on various local and indigenous technologies, 

f) generating consumers™ demand for millets 

based food products through awareness 

creation and g) processing and value addition 

techniques will be implemented in a massive 

way under various ongoing/new programmes.
Market LinkagesBusiness Incubators for Millets.  Ensuring millets and millet based 
value added foods in the ready-to-eat and 

ready-to-cook form is the need of the hour.  For 
this, establishment of business incubators is 

essential. Business incubators for processing 

of millets and production of millet based 

value added products will be established 

by entrepreneurs.  These incubators 

help to upscale processing methods for 

development of traditional foods, production 
of millet based bakery products, millet based 

extruded products, functional health mix, 

ready-to-cook, ready-to-eat convenience 
foods, low glycemic health foods and high 
5757
Mission, setting up these incubators is 

proposed and will be implemented through 
Department of Agricultural Marketing and 

Agri Business.Modernisation of Millet Processing Unit 
and Value Addition. Millets being small seeded, contain 
large proportions of husk and bran which 

requires de-husking and de-braning prior 

to consumption.  Despite their nutritional 

superiority, utilization of millets is restricted 



millets in ready-to-eat form.  Hence, millets 





processing units are essential to increase 

the availability of millets in the ready-to-use 

form.  Financial assistance for establishment 

of modern millets based processing units and 

modernization of existing millet processing 

units to increase the recovery percentage 

are the required strategies to achieve the 

objectives.  The proposed Millets Mission 

would extend such necessary assistance 

through Department of Agricultural 

Marketing and Agri Business.Distribution of Millets through PDS. 
Millets are also consumed by a certain 
percentage of high end consumers.  A study on preference of food grains indicated that 
consumers may be willing to increase the 

offtake of millets through PDS if it is made 

available at the outlets.  Hence, through the 
Millets Mission, it is suggested to provide 

three kg of any one of the available millets 
to all family card holders.  The family card 

holders eligible for rice could be provided with 
three kg of millets per month if requested 

at no additional cost.  The other category 

of family card holders will be provided with 

three kg of millets at subsidized rate. The 

total requirement of millets for 1.97 crore 

family card holders will be 59,100 tonnes/

month and their annual requirement would 

be seven L.MT. PulsesGenerally, production and productivity 
of pulses could not be matched with the 

increasing area since pulses are mostly raised 
Source: Tamil Nadu Agricultural UniversityBox 3.1.2: Garden Land Pulses 
(GLP)-Improved Pulse Production 
TechnologyThiru.L.Lingavanaickker, Padarn-thapuli,Thoothukudi district, a farmer for 

the past 20 years demonstrated with his 
2 ha. land under blackgram by adopting 

improved production technology in garden 
land pulses. The technologies like 2 % DAP 


15 days was adopted which prevented 



number of pods/plant (32-34 nos.) and 
also maturation of black gram. Farmer 
was able to get a net income of `25,000 in 

75 days with minimum water usage, lower 

cost of production and also enriching soil 

health.as rainfed, intercrop and bund crop and 
are more susceptible to pests and diseases.  

Further, there are no suitable varieties to 
match up the highest yield obtained by other 

States. Needless to say, an extent of about 

three lakh hectares which is under rice fallow 
pulses also pull down the overall production 

and productivity of the State. The constraints 


be maintained in blackgram and greengram 

under rice fallow conditions due to improper 

levelling, uncertainty in time of sowing and 

terminal moisture stress under rice fallow 

conditions resulting in poor yield. 58The following strategies will be 
adopted during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
growth inducer.


raising redgram through transplantation 

of seedlings. Short duration redgram 

varieties like ICPL 87, Vamban1, VBN(RG)3 
will be promoted in a larger area.
conditions in a compact area.
released by ICRISAT such as ICPL 87119, 

ICPH 7035, ICPL 88039, ICPH 2671 & ICP 

2740.
like raingun, mobile sprinkler, etc to 
increase pure pulses area under irrigated 
condition 
fallow pulses.
and implements such as rotovators, 

power tillers, mobile sprinkler / raingun, 

pumpsets, plant protection equipments, 
laser land leveller etc. 
Mission Mode approach by tapping the 
existing potential except in the delta 
districts.
ŒWhole Village  Concept.Long Term Strategies for Pulses. 
alternate varieties with high yielding 

traits. Enhanced seed rate to be adopted 

to maintain optimum plant population. 
Minimum Support Price and procurement 
of grain pulses through PPP. 
post harvest infrastructure to minimize 

the losses. 
periodical review and  to monitor the price 

escalation.
ponds in more numbers will help the 

farmers to raise pulses crop even during 

summer season.
to raise more area under pulses and to 

involve them in seed production / value 
addition by providing incentives. Improved Pulses Production 
Technologies- as Whole Village 

ConceptOrganizing pulses villages is a 
major initiative wherein various integrated 




disease resistant varieties, b) seed treatment 

with Rhizobium and Phosphobacteria, c) 

Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) and 

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) adoption, 
Box 3.1.3: 'Pulse Wonder'ﬁPulse Wonderﬂ a new crop booster developed by Tamil Nadu Agricultural 

University (TNAU) will be made available 

to farmers at half the original cost to be 

applied in 50,000 ha. in 1695 villages 

to enhance productivity of pulses. This 
announcement was made by the Hon™ble 

Chief Minister to encourage adoption of 

the novel innovation of TNAU as a growth 

regulator viz, auxins. The ‚Pulse Wonder™ 
mixture can be applied as foliar spray 
preferably in the morning or late evening  



pulses, particularly, for blackgram and 

greengram (35 days after sowing) to reduce 



the production by 10 to 20 percent. This 
mixture can be used in lieu of DAP spray.  
Source: Dept. of Agriculture, GoTN.5959d) maintenance of optimum population and 
e) spraying of 2 percent DAP twice and using 

of ‚TNAU pulse wonder™ are to be adopted.  

These are recommended to obtain yield not 

less than 1000 kg/ha. for redgram and 750 

kg/ha for other pulses like blackgram and 

greengram. To encourage the farmers in 

getting higher yield, crop yield competitions 

are proposed to be conducted in pulses crops 

wherein the farmers will be awarded with 

cash prize and medals.CottonCotton cultivation can be revived, 



Further, new schemes will be introduced for 
production and distribution of quality seeds, 
bio-agents, contract farming, commodity 

group formation, promotion of farm 

machinery such as cotton plucking machine. 

The following strategies will be focused to 

overcome the constraints in enhancement of 

production and productivity. 1) increasing 

the availability of treated quality seeds with 

an emphasis on de-linted seeds, 2) Promotion 
of micro irrigation to conserve water and 

bring more area under cotton especially 

in dryland areas, 3) area expansion and 
production improvement of irrigated cotton 

through precision farming and transfer of 
Box. 3.1.4: Campaign for 
Traditional farm products 
Hon™ble Chief Minister announced a special initiative for 
`10.00 crore to 

promote traditional agricultural products 
viz., tender coconut, soap nut powder 

and cotton clothing. These products are 

suitable to the climatic conditions of the 

State. But, increasing westernisation 

and globalisation has reduced demand 
for these products. A renewed awareness 
campaign will be conducted to improve 

the demand by products promotion, 
packaging and advertising.Source: Dept. of Agriculture, GoTN.technology, 4) promote localized supply of 

quality seeds to meet requirement as per 

the SRR targets, 5) training farmers on IPM 

aspects and encouraging the usage of bio-

inputs including bio-pesticides, 6) supply 

of plant protection equipments, micro 
nutrients, bio-fertilizers at  subsidized  cost 

and 7) facilitate localized processing of lint 

through appropriate indigenous technology 
developed. SugarcaneIt is planned to extend subsidy for 
sett treatment, purchase of machinery, 

cultivation of tissue culture canes and usage 

of weedicides to overcome the bottlenecks 

faced in sugarcane cultivation.  Further, the 


Initiatives (SSI) comprising innovative 

technologies like precision farming for 

increasing the production and productivity.

bud nursery under SSI. 
row method of planting saves about 40 

percent of water besides assured increase 
in cane yield, it is planned to cover one 


and marginal farmers and 75 percent to 
other farmers for installing drip irrigation 

with fertigation will be extended. 
sugarcane growers at subsidized cost.OilseedsThe focus is on the following strategies 


increasing the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) 

and enhance the quality seed availability 

through seed village scheme, 2) bringing more 

area under oilseeds through promotion of 

micro irrigation and bring back two percent of 

other fallow lands under oilseeds cultivation, 
603) adoption of INM, IPM and bio-fertilizers 
usage, 4) encouraging  farmers on usage of 

micro nutrients for increasing productivity 

as well as oil content and 5) application of 

gypsum in groundnut crop to increase the 

productivity.CoconutWith an objective of distributing quality 
coconut seedlings to farmers and make them 
aware of modern technologies, Demonstration 

cum Coconut Seedling Production Farm 

at Jallipatty village in Udumalpet taluk, 

Tiruppur district will be established through 

the Coconut Development Board (CDB). For 

this purpose, an extent of 82.66 acres of land 
will be earmarked to the Board. Besides, steps 

will be taken for increasing the production of 

Dwarf x Tall Hybrid and Dwarf variety coconut 

seedlings in the State Coconut Nurseries and 

for improving the infrastructure facilities in 

those farms.Soil and Water Management 
ApproachesDuring the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it is 
proposed to take up detailed soil survey with 
the objective of identifying saline and alkaline 

soils and to reclamation of the problem soils. 

It is also proposed to take efforts to develop 

irrigation sources such as farm ponds, 

check dams, percolation ponds, etc., to meet 

the irrigation water requirement of rainfed 

crops at critical stage, for which funds 

under various schemes viz., A3P, Initiatives 

for Nutritional Security through Intensive 
Millets Promotion (INSIMP) and Rainfed 

Area Development Programme (RADP) will 
be dovetailed. (Detailed proposals on soil 

management are dealt in the sub chapter viz., 
3.2. Soil and Water Conservation including 

Rainfed Farming) Precision FarmingPrecision farming is an innovative 
method in which all the cultivation protocols 

are undertaken very accurately. Key steps 

viz., chisel ploughing, transplanting of 

young seedling, adopting recommended 
spacing, installing drip and micro irrigation 
and timely application of critical inputs are 

followed.   Upon success of the programme 

and unprecedented level of acceptance of the 

technology by the farmers, the programme 



years. It is proposed to further expand the 
project to cover 1 lakh ha. under precision 
farming during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
period.  Further it is also proposed to form 

precision vegetable clusters with market 

tie up or direct marketing by farmers by 
incorporating producers companies.National Mission on Micro 
Irrigation (NMMI)The conventional method of irrigation 
requires more water leading to wastage.  The 
use of micro irrigation systems like drip, 



of surface as well as ground water resources.  

Each drop of water is made productive in this 

technology. Uniform crop growth and produce 

size are achieved through this method.  Using 

micro irrigation, more area can be brought 

under cultivation with less water.  NMMI 

is a centrally sponsored scheme,  in which  

100 percent subsidy is given to small and 

marginal farmers (50 percent by Centre and 

50 percent by State) and 75 percent (40 
percent by Centre and 35 percent by State) 
to other category farmers for installation of 

drip, sprinkler and raingun systems for all 
horticulture crops and agriculture crops 

like sugarcane, coconut, cotton, maize, 

groundnut and pulses.  This scheme is being 

implemented only through registered and 



Twelfth Five Year Plan period, it is proposed 

cover an area of 3.10 lakh ha. under micro 

irrigation (1.86 L.ha. under horticulture 

crops and 1.24 L.ha under agriculture crops).Micro Irrigation Model VillagesTo give a big push to extend the 
area coverage under micro irrigation, a 

model village in each district will be set up 

to demonstrate the advantages of micro 

irrigation.  It is also proposed to provide micro 

irrigation equipments at subsidised cost and 
impart training to the farmers.6161Approach and Strategies for 
Profitable Agriculture
according to the local demand and consumption
Government on pilot basis to promote 
sustainable agriculture and to provide 
technical assistance, design cropping 
pattern, supply of  inputs viz., seeds, 

fertilizers, plant protection chemicals, 

irrigation facilities, farm machinery, 

etc., post harvest management, food 

processing, market linkages etc.,
system and nursery to reduce the cost 

of cultivation in terms of consumption of 
inputs such as, seeds, fertilizers, water, 

labour, capital, etc. and to accelerate the 

pace of appropriate low cost mechanization.
possessed by small and marginal farmers 
and promotion of community based 
farming system, which will enable them to 

take up mechanized agriculture and other 
hi-tech farming practices without any 


enables the farmers to take up various 

enterprises at one place and ensures 

are mainly organized for supporting 

micro enterprises with the assistance of 
micro credit shall now be entrusted with 



As the size of the operational holdings 

decline day by day, the Government can 
promote SHGs to take up agriculture as a 
profession by providing agricultural lands, 

current fallows and wastelands on lease 

basis. This can be made viable only if they 
have backward linkages with technical 

backup and credit and forward linkages 
with processing and adequate market 

infrastructure.

and ensures assured and remunerative 
marketing opportunities. Promotion of 
primary producers™ cooperatives and 

corporate, that can adopt contract farming 


being ploughed back into the farming 
community.
Organic Farming Policy in the State to 

encourage toxic free organic farming 

besides ensuring food security. Inputs: Seeds, Fertilizers and other 
Inputs Seeds: Seed SystemsQuality seed is the key input for realizing potential productivity. The following 
initiatives will be focused in the Twelfth Five 



seeds and ensuring adequate stocks and 
timely supply of quality seeds to farmers  for 

which the State will prepare a comprehensive 

Seed Plan, b) Sensitizing farmers on 

production and usage of indigenous and 



entrepreneurs in quality seed production, d). 

Involving farmers, women SHGs, TANWABE 

groups and NGOs in local seed production and 
seed processing activities and e) Improving 

infrastructure facilities for seed production, 

processing and storage.Enhancing Seed Replacement Rate 
(SRR)An Action Plan for all the blocks has been prepared by incorporating details of crop 
wise / variety wise requirement of breeder 





would be prepared to meet the requirements 
indicated in the Action Plan with the following 



TNAU / ICAR Institutes to meet the breeder 
seed requirements, b) tie-up arrangements 




seed requirement for enhanced SRR, c) 

quality seed production, processing and 

distribution involving Farmers™ Interest 
62Groups (FIG), SHGs, TANWABE groups 
and NGOs, d) upgradation of infrastructure 

facilities including agricultural implements in 

the State Seed Farms (SSFs) to increase the 
cropping area to produce additional quantity 

of foundation seeds, e) enhancing the seed 
processing capacity by utilizing the  20 new 

SPUs in addition to the already existing SPUs 
in the Department of Agriculture and the 75 
new SPUs to be established involving farmers, 

women SHGs and NGOs with back ended 

subsidy and f) emphasizing the farmers to 

register their farms with the Department of 



through Seed Village programme  seed 

requirement. The following suggestions are given 

1) generation system of seed multiplication 

(NucleusŒBreederŒFoundationŒCertified) 

should be strictly followed, 2) strengthening 

of SSFs for quality seed production, 3) seed 
production on contract basis in farmers™ 



incentives and adequate infrastructure 
facilities like power,   irrigation, credit etc., 

for farmer operated seed production centres, 



areas, declaring as seed valley, provide safety 

from seed contamination and encouraging 



and storage and 7) increasing awareness 

on appropriate usage of  hybrid seeds by 

the  farmers.  The seed demand projection 
for major crops during  the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan is provided in Table. 3.1.6.Table 3.1.6: Seed Demand Projection  for Major Agricultural Crops - Twelfth Plan         
S.No.Crop2012-132013-142014-152015-162016-17
12
3
4
5Paddy
Millets
Pulses
Oilseeds
Cotton187004704949
6503102187004805050
6627104187004905150
6752106187005005256
6877108187005105362
7014110  Village Level Seed Bank for Rainfed 
Crops through Participatory 
ApproachWith the advent of hybrid technology, 
the farmers are required to replenish seeds 
every season from external sources such 

as research institutions, public and private 

sector seed producers to harness hybrid 

vigour. This has increased the productivity 



increased farmers™ dependence on external 
agencies. As a result, the informal and 

decentralized village seed industry has now 

been replaced by highly centralized seed 

market. However, it is almost impossible for 
the organized sector to meet farmers demand 
for the seed, considering the number of crops and varieties cultivated across the country.  

In this back drop, the concept of ‚seed village™ 



production and distribution of quality seeds, 

is fast gaining momentum. Seed villages 

or village seed banks operate with utmost 

transparency, mutual trust and social 
responsibility of the seed producing farmers 

towards seed using fellow farmers and under 

peer supervision. The establishment of village 

seed banks not only ensure good quality 
seeds for enhancing productivity, but also 

help in generating income for the community 
members resulting in improved livelihoods. It 

is proposed to form 7000 Commodity Interest 

Groups, 5000 village seed banks and to train 

1.25 lakh farmers.  6363Seed Certification
the involvement of private producers for 
producing more of millets, pulses and 

oilseeds crop seeds. Increased attention will 

be paid to meet timely availability of breeder 

seeds to the seed producers. To satisfy the 

need for quality seed distribution to the 


wing has proposed to certify 1.2 LMT of major 

crop seeds during the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan. Focus on strengthening the organic 



at the international standard will be done. 





as PGS will be promoted.  It is also proposed 

to establish laboratories for testing samples 

of soil, water, pesticides, residues, heavy 

metals and food products accredited by 

National Accreditation Board for Testing and 

Calibrating Laboratories (NABL).     Fertilizers Soil Nutrient ManagementIntensive cropping, indiscriminate use 


resources has resulted in the deterioration 

of the physical, chemical and biological 

health of soil.  Appropriate soil management 

technologies to improve the soil health and to 



fertilizer application through distribution 

of FIHBs, b) emphasizing and encouraging 

organic farming, c) reclamation of saline and 
alkaline soils and d) correcting micro nutrient 


soil health, it is proposed to produce and 

distribute liquid bio-fertilizers which have 

advantages such as longer shelf life of 12 

to 14 months, free of contamination, higher 
microbial population, cost effective and easy 

to use  Referral Laboratories for Complete 
Soil AnalysisThe era of indiscriminate use of NPK is 
over and due to dwindling supply of organics to soil, the soil organic carbon, humus and 
microbial load have come down considerably 

and the soil has also lost the micronutrient 

replenishing capacity in locations where 
two crops in a year or crops like turmeric, 

tapioca, banana, sugarcane are cultivated. 

Hence, external application of micronutrients 
for every crop and every season has become 

compulsory. The foliar application is only 

supplementary while the soil requires 

regular application. The existing soil testing 

laboratories have the facility to analyze NPK, 

micronutrients, Electrical Conductivity (EC), 

pH etc.The proposed referral laboratory for 
complete soil analysis lends support to the 

farmer by providing micronutrient analytical 

information for better productivity of crops. 

The complete soil analysis includes the 

estimation of micro organism status of the 
soil. One such common facility for the state 

with capacity to handle 1000 samples a day 

shall serve the purpose. The approximate 

outlay proposed is   `5.00 crore.Efficiency in Use of Chemical 
FertilizersTamil Nadu is adopting a multipronged 
strategy to maintain soil health and fertility 
status of the soil by the balanced application 

of inorganic and organic fertilizers. Schemes 

such as balanced and integrated use of 

fertilizers, production and distribution of 

bio-fertilizers, procurement and distribution 

of green manure seeds, vermi-composting of 

farm waste, composting of farm wastes with 
Pleurotus are implemented.Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) was 





continue to increase their retail prices (RP) 

without prior notice frame, citing hike in the 
international prices of raw materials. For 

example, DAP (50kg bag) cost increased by 

187 percent over MRP (`990/-) in 2011 from 
`468.20/- in 2010. To reduce the burden of 

farmers, the Tamil Nadu Government has 
exempted 4 percent Value Added Tax (VAT) 


64present NBS system is detrimental to farmers, 
the GOI may intervene by revising (increasing) 
the subsidy. Liquid biofertilizer producing centres 
will be established to improve the shelf life of 

biofertilizers, at a cost of 
`2.75 crore through 
GOI assisted funds.Fertilizer2012-132013-142014-152015-162016-17
UreaDAP
MoP
Complex11.505.30
5.31
7.6112.005.56
5.57
7.9912.605.83
5.85
8.3913.236.12
6.14
8.8013.896.42
6.44
9.24Total29.7231.1232.6734.29
35.99 Source:  Dept. of Agriculture, GoTNTable 3.1.7:  Inorganic Fertilizer Demand Projection for the Twelfth Plan Effective Management of Pesticide 
ConsumptionThe successful adoption of Non-
Pesticidal Management (NPM) in several 
rainfed and irrigated cropping systems has 

led to change in policy and research. Tamil 

Nadu is particularly attentive to increased 

adoption of this productivity enhancing, 

cost-effective and eco-friendly production 

practices.The increased use of pesticides has 
disturbing consequences on the farming 

system, particularly, due to the development 

of resistance, resurgence of insect pests and 
decline in population of the natural enemies 

of pests.  Over-use of pesticides may lead 

to serious repercussion on environment 

and ecology. Hence, it is imperative to step 

up investment in research and technology, 

development of organic and bio-pesticides 

that are more effective in managing crops 
in an environmentally sustainable manner. 



with different crops to identify crop and 


a participatory research framework.Tamil Nadu is one of the pioneer 
states in successful adoption of IPM and 


awareness on the indiscriminate usage of 

chemical pesticides, b) Promote knowledge 

of local production of bio-pesticides, c). 



programmes and exchange programmes and 

d) Provide subsidies for technologies that are 

part of the IPM and NPM practices.Horticulture 
With an aim to achieve a growth rate of 9 percent to 10 percent in horticulture, 
more area will be brought under horticulture 



low income generating crops to high value 
horticulture crops. The overall production 

and productivity of the horticulture crops 

will be doubled during the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan period.  Horticultural Parks for fruits, 

vegetables and spices would be developed 

across the state.  More thrust will be given 

to micro irrigation with fertigation, precision 

farming, hi-density planting and organic 

cultivation by which large area will be 

covered under horticulture crops thereby the 

productivity per drop of water integrated crop 

management, post harvest management and 

market linkages and per unit area will be 

enhanced.6565Urban Organic Cultivation 
Increase in personal disposable income and awareness on food safety among urban dwellers have opened the gates for 
urban organic cultivation of vegetables.  The 
consumers are getting the information on 

harmfulness of pesticides on human health 

and their entry into food chain through 

effective media and internet. Kitchen 

gardening and terrace gardening are handy 

tools that could satisfy the vegetable needs 
of most of the nuclear families of the urban 

centres.  Besides the above, these gardens 

act as potential stress reducers.  Models of 
kitchen gardening and terrace gardening 

to suit the urban consumers are already 

available with TNAU and matching the 

requirements of consumers is the only need. 

Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, it has 

been proposed to convert the awareness into 
actual kitchen and terrace garden models 

through capacity building programmes.  

The IEC funds available in the existing 
horticultural programmes will be utilized.   Popularising of Banana Cultivation 
Model of Theni in Intensive Banana 

Cultivation Tracts 
Box 3.1.5: Banana Growers 
Company, TheniBanana Growers Association with 
3,500 small farmers and a trader in a joint venture project in agriculture promoted a 
popular banana variety and cultivation 

has been undertaken in 20, 000 acres at 
Theni. Trader has established a ripening 
and a cold storage facility of 200 MT 

capacity at an investment of `20.00 crore. 

This has opened up the avenue of exporting 

to Dubai when they are competing with 

Maharashtra banana. The initiative of 

common ripening and storage facility has 

increased the prospects of Theni banana 

growers over the past 6 years.Source : Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN. The Banana Growers™ Association 
model conferred higher and stable income 
for the farmers and resulted in increased 

share in consumer™s rupee.  In Tamil Nadu, 

potential belts of banana cultivation are 

available at Thothukudi, Thirupathur taluk 

in Vellore district, Krishnagiri district (Elakki 

banana) and Alangudi taluk in Pudukottai 

district.  Farmers of the above tracts will be 

given exposure visits to Theni to emulate 

similar successful models in their locality.  

Also, capacity building programmes will 
be arranged for institutional building and 

technological upgradation.  In the Twelfth 

Five Year Plan, it has been proposed to form 

farmers™ federations in the above districts 

with active convergence of Department of 

Horticulture and Plantation Crops, TNAU 
and NGOs. Farmers™ Federations for Marketing 
of Flowers 

marketing models are functioning in Dindugul and Madurai districts for marketing 



unique Geographical Indication (GI).  Due to 

the initiatives of NGOs and TNAU, successful 



been evolved in Gobichettipalayam block 

of Erode district and this initiative needs 

institutionalization for further upscaling and 

sustenance.  Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year 

Plan it has been proposed to give adequate 





tracts viz., Vellore (marigold) and Krishnagiri 

(chrysanthemum), Thiruvannamalai 

(tuberose).  Farmers™ federation will be 

formed and the farmers will be facilitated 

with group marketing to get higher price for 

their produce.New Initiatives in Horticultural 
Crops
crops by adopting all Hi-tech horticultural 
technologies, Model Horticulture Villages 

covering an extent of 40-100 ha. in 15 

districts is proposed.66
subsidy for construction of pandhals and distribution of hybrid vegetable seeds for 
promoting the pandhal vegetables viz., 

bittergourd, snake gourd and ribbed 
gourd.


demonstration unit in 0.4 ha. will 
be established in State Horticulture 

Farm, Kodaikanal. Excellence centres 


established.
an aim to create awareness among farmers 
on latest technologies in horticulture 

and to create export opportunities, an 
International Horti Fair will be organized 

in Chennai.
of planting materials of horticulture crops 
a new State Horticulture Farm will be 

established in an extent of 10 acres at 
Srirangam, Trichy district. 
horticulture parks in the State.
`10.18 crore in Dindigul district and ornamental 


district at a cost of `8.8 crore are proposed, 


using mobile based agro advisory system 
has been proposed.  Also, formation of 

Farmers Interest Groups and formation of 
Producers company has been proposed.
in Tamil) containing information on key 
production strategies for horticulture 
crops and other related information has 
been released. Agricultural EngineeringMechanisation in agriculture is still limited to usage of tractors and motor 

pumps. With availability of better paying 

service sector and construction jobs, 

increased migration from agriculture to other 
sectors is observed in Tamil Nadu during 
the last decade. To increase the productivity 

of the land and to cope up with shrinking 

agricultural manpower, mechanisation is 
not only essential but also imperative. The 

constraints in promotion of mechanisation 

include non standardized agricultural 
practices, small and marginal land holdings, 

low investment capacity of farmers, lack of 

know-how and non availability of service 

and maintenance facilities. Policy and 

structural mechanisms shall be developed to 

address these issues and support increased 

mechanisation in all phases of agriculture 

(Vision Tamil Nadu 2023).
approach is being adopted to promote farm 



heavy duty high value machinery will be 

purchased by the AED for custom hiring to 
farmers, b) at the second level, medium-sized 

agricultural machinery and equipments will 

be procured by PACCS for custom hiring 

to farmers. For this, the societies are being 
provided with a subsidy of 50 percent of the 

cost, not exceeding 
`20 lakh, to purchase a 

set of agricultural machinery, c) at the third 
level, farmers, SHGs and farmers groups 

will be assisted with subsidy to acquire 

agricultural machinery and equipment. Solar Energy Policy 2012 envisages 
judicious use of solar power and in line with 
the Policy, farmers will be motivated for Solar 

energization of irrigation pumpsets.  Provision 



one hand and it also reduces the burden on 

the State Grid on the other. 6767Establishment of Agro Service Unit 
in every PACCSIt is proposed to establish an agro 
service unit in every Primary Agricultural 
Cooperative Credit Society (PACCS) in the 

State for providing necessary agricultural 

machinery/implements to the farmers on hire 

basis. As the farmers do not have adequate 

knowledge to operate and maintain the 

agricultural machinery, it is also proposed to 

form farmers group in the jurisdiction of every 
PACCS to render necessary service support 

to the farmers in that area on various aspects 

of operation, repair and maintenance of 

various agricultural machinery/implements. 

This farmers group will also take part in the 

activities like raising of seedlings, custom 

hiring, supply of machinery and labour for 

various agricultural operations in that area. 

In Tamil Nadu, 4534 numbers of PACCS 

are functioning. It is proposed to continue 

the programme of providing agricultural 
machinery/implements to 3500 PACCS.
Mode Approach to increase the pace of 
agricultural mechanisation in the State and 



& water resources techniques for sustainable 

agriculture in rainfed areas. Crop varieties 
will be selected to suit the mechanization and 

facilitation for easy movement of machinery 

by adopting planned planting. Online Booking of Farm Machinery Presently, the farmer has to approach 
in person for booking the farm machinery in 
AED which drains time and money.  Hence, 
the Department of Agriculture has planned 

to provide an online booking system of farm 

machinery through the existing AGRISNET 

web portal.  With this system, the farmers 

can plan well ahead about the requirement of 

farm machinery and book it online through 

telephone and can make payment online 

through a payment gateway. This would help 

the farmers, to save time and money.SF and MF Friendly Machinery 
Average farm size in Tamil Nadu is 0.80 ha and it is declining year after year.  
The intensity of marginalization of holdings 

gets aggravated due to increase in population, 
subdivision and fragmentation.  On the 

other hand, increasing labour shortage in 

agriculture has resulted in dependence of 

machinery.  Owing to the size of holdings, the 
capacity utilization of the machinery is not 

achieved in most of the farms as the existing 
machinery are designed for larger farm size.  

Increased availability of machinery in villages 

has reduced the potential revenue generation 

through custom hiring.  In this context, usage 

of these machinery that are in vogue in small 
farms of Korea and Japan would be a viable 

alternative.  Small size of these machinery 

demand relatively lesser initial capital and 

can be utilized fully in the small holdings.  

Hence, in the Twelfth Five Year Plan it has 

been proposed to popularize these small 

and marginal farmer friendly machinery.  In 
addition to this, plant breeders should give 

emphasis on developing varieties which 

facilitate the use of these types of machinery.
Crop Insurance - National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme 

(NAIS)The State Government is making 

Insurance Schemes by introducing interim 
compensation to insured farmers, reducing 

the insurance unit area to revenue village level, 

uniform seasonality discipline, on account 

payment of claims for timely disbursement, 



to take risks in agriculture and protect them 
at the time of distress.The NAIS, since its inception has 
reached the pinnacle as of now in enrolling the 
farmers, area insured and premium subsidy.  

Initially, the farmers especially non-loanee 

farmers were reluctant to enroll under this 

scheme.  However, extension of 50 percent 

premium subsidy to both loanee and non-

loanee farmers brought higher percentage of 

farming community into the Crop Insurance 

Schemes. 68
for both loanee and non-loanee farmers.

and non-loanee farmers, as every time 
the State Government has to depend on 
Government of India for extension of cut-

off date as and when the cultivation of 

crops gets delayed either due to delayed 
release of water from major reservoirs or 

due to natural calamities. 
extended under Crop Insurance Scheme 
so as to bring all the farmers under 

insurance coverage. 
based on the Crop Cutting Experiments 

can be conducted for which State 

government shall be authorized to 
outsource manpower to conduct the 
experiments.
worked out by comparing average yield 
with threshold yield which normally 

deprives affected insured farmers of 
compensation. Hence, the government 

can compensate affected individual 
farmers on merit basis.
scheme is proposed to be implemented on 
pilot basis in selected blocks by removing 
the bottlenecks in the existing NAIS and 
for timely disbursement of compensation. Crop Insurance Œ Weather Based 
Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS)The critical stages of a crop such as 

stages are insured for weather parameters like 


humidity, consecutive dry days, wind speed, 

etc.  Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) have 

been established in 224 blocks and linked with 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University website 
to provide medium range weather forecast to 
carry out agriculture related activities by the 

farmers in time and also to provide weather 

data to the insurance companies. TNAU was 


based crop insurance products. Sensitization 

programmes were conducted to bring 
awareness about the products.Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme 
(CPIS)Coconut, a perennial crop which 
in Tamil Nadu in an extent of 4.00 L.ha. 

with a production of 55,471 lakh nuts and 
productivity of 13,852 nuts/ha. and there 

are better prospects to bring more area 

and increase the production besides value 

addition.  Coconut cultivation is largely 

affected by natural calamities.  In view of 

this, CPIS has been introduced on pilot basis 
in 11 districts with the objective to provide 

insurance coverage against natural and other 

perils, provide relief against income loss, 

minimize risks and encourage replanting.  

Healthy nut bearing coconut palms grown as 
mono or intercrop, on bunds or homestead 

and all varieties of coconut (Tall varieties of 

7 to 60 years and Dwarf and hybrids of 4 to 

60 years) are insured.  Individual farmers/
growers cultivating atleast 10 healthy nut 

bearing palms are eligible for enrolment.  The 

subsidy pattern is 50 percent by CDB, 25 

percent by State government and 25 percent 
by farmer.  6969Rural transformation
MGNREGSMany departments are implementing various schemes with an aim to uplift the 

economic status of rural population. If there 
is convergence among the departments, 

synergistic effect can be achieved resulting in 
holistic development of rural areas. Mahatma 

Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 

Scheme (MGNREGS) is implemented by 

Rural Development Department to generate 

employment opportunities in rural areas. 
The schemes implemented by Department of 

Agriculture can be integrated with MGNREGA 

so that the agricultural activities can be 

carried out in time by utilizing the available 

labour effectively.Role of Science and Technology in 
the Development of AgricultureTechnology is the prime mover of 
productivity and atleast one third of the future growth in productivity would come 

through innovations in crop technologies. 





technological practices. Technological 

breakthrough is an essential factor to 

increase the productivity and it is imperative 
that the obsolete practices adopted should be 
replaced with suitable interventions to double 

the productivity and to achieve the ultimate 
goal of food and nutritional security.The interventions should focus on 
developing suitable technologies for bridging 

the yield gap, development of drought and 





technology.Strengthening Extension for Effective 
Delivery 

inputs, best service, information, transfer 
of technology to farmers in time by 
integration of all sister departments. 
and NGOs in extension through technical 

training.
Agricultural Extension Management 

Institute to conduct training to the 
farmers, Farm Women Groups and FIGs.Strengthening of ATMA
Agency (ATMA) has to function as an 
independent agency with devolution of 

powers
link between the extension system 

and farmers at village level through 
bottom up approach, to promote group 
based approach, to involve farmers in 
planning and execution of schemes to 
suit their local needs, to encourage PPP 

and for recruitment of Farmer Friend to 

mobilize Farmer™s Groups and facilitate 

dissemination of information.
bottom up planning involving farmers and 
all the stakeholders.  


farmers, NGOs, commodity groups can 

be integrated with research scientists of 
TNAU and Extension functionaries of the 
Department of Agriculture.Uzhavar Peruvizha 
 ‚Uzhavar Peruvizha™ is a village 
level mass contact programme in Campaign 
Mode and it has been conducted for effective 

dissemination of information to help farmers 

to take rational decisions about various 

activities in agriculture and allied  sectors. 

This campaign was organized at the village 
level in all 16,564 revenue villages to enable 

the farmers to take on the challenges posed 
by today™s  agriculture and gear them up 

to be a part of Second Green Revolution in 
the State. This campaign was conducted 
70through ‚Mobile Extension Centre Approach™ 


agriculture and allied sectors and other 

stakeholders like input suppliers, bankers. 

All the stake holders spent one whole day 

with farmers to disseminate information 
and technologies. Integrated Farming 
System is being popularized during the 

mass contact programme. The information 

was disseminated through Street theatres, 
folk dance, songs, workshop with focus on 

the local farm problems and appropriate 

solutions. Various demonstrations, Mini 

Exhibition, discussion, Audio Visual shows, 

Mini cattle health camps were also conducted. 

Besides, farmers™ baseline data, soil testing, 

feed back on Government Farmers™ Integrated 

Handbooks and Farmers Guide Books were 

also distributed to the farmers. Based on the 
success of Uzhavar Peruvizha, it is proposed 

to conduct mass campaign every year to serve 
the farmers at their door steps.Gender - Empowerment of Women 
FarmersThe Government of Tamil Nadu has 
taken the following special initiatives in the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan to motivate women 



tune of 30 percent to 33 percent extended 

under various crop oriented schemes, 
 b) empowerment of farm women through 

capacity building on decision-making in the 

context of farm management, seed production 

and marketing, agricultural marketing with 
respect to post-harvest management, value 
addition of agricultural produce and market 
requirements/demand and c) Empowering 

farm women groups by distribution of gender 
friendly farm equipments, farm machinery 

for their use and hiring.  Farm women are 

motivated to form Farm Women groups and 



business and encourage farm women form 

commodity groups under ATMA. Box 3.1.6: Shift towards High 
Value CropsBurgur™s women farmers shifted to 
Rosemary cultivation when the  aromatic 

crop was introduced by MYRADA 
KVK, Erode district. Women Rosemary 

Association presently undertakes 

cultivation and marketing.  Technical 



distillation unit by district administration 

and poly-tunnel drying technology and 
structure provided by TNAU has helped 
the group™s income increase by 5 times.  

The association has negotiated a market 
tie up with leading companies. Source : Dept. of Horticulture and Plantation Crops, GoTN.Equity Issues- Small and Marginal 
FarmersThe following interventions have 
been made by the Government for involving 
the small and marginal farmers in the 


incentives over and above the Minimum 


Government for paddy and sugarcane.  7171
percent of the allocation under various crop oriented schemes to encourage small 


under these schemes and to motivate 
them to take up agriculture continuously.
marginal farmers to install drip irrigation 

units 
of crop loans.
State + 5 percent Central Government) to 

the small and marginal loanee farmers 
and 55 percent subsidy (50 percent State 
+ 5 percent Central Government) to small 

and marginal non-loanee farmers under 
Crop Insurance Scheme to motivate 

them to tackle the risks in agriculture by 
adopting progressive farm practices, usage 

of high value inputs, ultimately aiming on 
increasing the production.
small and marginal farmers for damaged 
crops in the event of natural calamities.  

At present `10,000/-per hectare is 
extended for paddy crop, `8,000/- and 
` 4,000/- for other irrigated and rainfed 

crops respectively.
general, preference will be given to small 

and marginal farmers.Innovative Schemes for Upliftment 
of Scheduled Caste / Scheduled 

Tribe FarmersThe proactive policy interventions of the Government of India and the State    
Government are to improve the socio-

economic status of the scheduled caste 

farmers for which the governments are 



oriented schemes in proportion to scheduled 

caste™s population in the State which now 
stands at 19 percent. In order to improve the 
economic status and to ensure transparency 
in implementing schemes exclusively for SC/

ST farmers, following schemes are proposed 

in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.Purchase of Wetlands for SC/ST 
FarmersWetlands are of major importance 
in agricultural systems and are becoming 
even more valuable components of agro-

ecosystems. The general understanding was 

that SCs do not own contiguous areas and 
that their holdings are scattered in the midst 

of land held by others. It may be observed 

that nearly two-thirds of the SCs and over 80 

percent of the STs are engaged in agricultural 
activities. On the other hand, only about 

53 percent of the ‚Others™ are involved in 
these activities. By and large, the SC & 

ST population depend on rain water and 
natural water resources for cultivating their 



existing irrigational facilities as available to 

other agricultural communities.  Under this 

backdrop, it is imperative to provide wetlands 

to SC/ST farmers as it will be one of the viable 

livelihood to uplift the economic status of the 

farmers.  The scheme may be implemented 

by the Revenue Department.Apart from the above, a separate 
provision of outlay in case of IFS, 
multiplication and distribution of seeds, 

distribution of inputs especially tractor and 

machinery, establishment of food processing 

units, cold storage units and coverage of 
crop/weather insurance scheme and other 

welfare schemes.           
72Table 3.1.8: Outcome and Measurable outputsSchemeOutcomeOutputPrecision FarmingProtected CultivationHi-Tech Productivity Enhancement 
ProgrammeModernization of State Horticulture FarmNational Mission on Micro IrrigationNational Horticulture Mission 
i) Hi Tech Nurseryii) Hi density Plantingiii) Canopy management/
Rejuvenationiv) Farm Mechanization60-80 percent increased yield


Produce
30 percent Premium Price
Extended Shelf life

Less labour dependence 
30-40percent water economy
Extended harvest ensuring  higher 
price
Technical, economical & social  
empowerment of farmers
Increased Productivity per unit  Area
High Quality Produce 
Sustainable income to farmers
Improved livelihood status of 
farmersLess labour dependenceHigh quality planting material
Drudgery alleviation
Reduced cost of production
High quality of Labour produce40- 50 percent water saving
Uniform crop growth.
Increase in yield
Less labour dependence
Uniform application of 
fertilizers through fertigationLess labour dependence High quality planting materialsIncreased Productivity per unit  Area
High Quality Produce 
Sustainable income to farmers
Improved livelihood status of 
farmersSenile orchards are made productive.
The cost is reduced by avoiding 
planting materials and other labour 
cost. Less labour dependence
yield 10 percent of vegetable area will be 
covered in a period of 10 years5 percent of total Mango & Cashew 
area will be covered under HDP in a 
period of 10 years.25 percent increase in production level of planting materials

30 percent increase in productivity 
levels of orchard crops.20 percent of Horticultural crop 
area will be covered in a period of 10 
years25 percent increase in production of planting materials
30 percent increase in productivity 
of orchard crops.10 percent of old and senile orchards  will be rejuvenated  and 
brought under high density5 percent  hort. farming will be 
mechanised in 10 years7373Reversing the Trend of Declining 
Agricultural GrowthThe Twelfth Five Year Plan has 
propounded the unique concept of Farm 
Level Planning which views the constraints in 
agriculture holistically and suggests practical 

solutions on individual farm unit basis and 

thereby contemplates to bring the desired 

increase in farm production.  Strengthening 

research and extension services to all 

farm families in Tamil Nadu-Farm level 

interventions for ﬁend-to-endﬂ involvement 
of extension staff with individual farmer has 

been planned. The Twelfth Five Year Plan 





(SRI) and SRI villages, improved pulses 

production technologies viz., System of Pulses 



Sustainable Sugarcane Initiatives (SSI) and 

Precision Farming to bridge the yield gap.  

Also, strategies are designed for improving 

agricultural marketing infrastructure and 

promoting farmers™ participation in agri-
business ventures. The Twelfth Five Year 

Plan has also framed strategies to increase 
the cultivable area and diversifying the 

cultivation in favour of high value horticulture 
and commercial crops while ensuring the food 

and nutritional security is ensured through 

the proposed Millet Mission. The requirement 
of agricultural inputs by the farmers will 
be assessed through ISMS by conducting 

meetings at village panchayat level and 

bottom up planning will be given priority 

so as to meet the local needs effectively 
and strategies are designed for ensuring 

the timely availability of adequate quantity 

of inputs. Apart from the above Integrated 

Farming System will be popularized so as to 

increase the farm income. Gender inclusive 

approach is given much focus and there 



equipments such as power weeders and 

markers. Adequate focus is bestowed on 

soil health improvement and reclamation 

of saline and alkaline soil, issue of Farmers 
Integrated Hand Book, promoting hi-tech 
agriculture, Precision Farming and Micro 



The Twelfth Five Year Plan includes strategies 

for need based human development through 

establishment of district poly-technics. The 

plan also proposes decentralized planning in 

the rural sector and linking it to the urban 

markets, and revitalizing the villages leading 

to the retention of the rural population in 
agriculture and allied sectors.  An amount of `7922.80 crore has been proposed in the Twelfth Five Year Plan 

and the details are given in the Table 3.1.9. Table 3.1.9: Twelfth Plan Outlay Œ Crop Husbandry Sector(` crore)S.No.Agriculture (Crop Husbandry)
Outlay12
3456Ongoing scheme
Procurement and Distribution of Paddy, millet and pulses seeds (including 
TSP/SCP).National Agricultural Development Programme (NADP)- including special 
programme for agricultural mechanization, Est. Agro Service UnitCrop insurance including WBCIS.

Oil seed production programme including ISOPOM and coconut development.National Horticultural Mission (NHM).
Horticulture Development-including Spl. Area development.287.051229.321200.92180.27
120.00217.9774 Table 3.1.9: Twelfth Plan Outlay Œ Crop Husbandry Sector (Contd.)(` crore)S.No.Agriculture (Crop Husbandry)Outlay78
9
10
111213
14
15
16
171819
20
21
22
23
24
252627
28National Mission on Micro Irrigation.
Production Incentives to farmers for supply of paddy.
Micro Nutrient mixture.

Others - ongoing
IAMWARM
Total Ongoing
New Schemes
Purchase of Wet land and distribution-SCP
Farm level planning



Sustainable sugarcane initiatives(SSI)
Soil Management Approaches- Soil Survey & Reclamation of Saline and alkaline soils and reclamation of fallow landsVillage Knowledge centres in all districts
Integrated Farming System Approach(including SC/ST farmers)
Formation and scaling up of Commodity groups

Crop Insurance Scheme @ 100 percent premium subsidy
Bio-fertiliser production units

Village level seed bank
Distribution of Tractor with trailer -SCP
Others-publicity, Training the youth on operation and maintenance of machineries, awareness creation, IIFS, dry land development
Seed production and distribution ( special programme)
Establishment of Community Radio Stations

Uzhavar Peruvizha
Total-New Schemes700.001000.00175.00
225.4849.825385.83200.00
338.37
425.2050.00250.00
261.0045.00137.5050.00150.0060.98111.0075.00
38.9280.0014.00250.002536.97 Grand Total7922.801  Is 
the 
current land use pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani Basin 
of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
   K. R. Karunakaran
 Associate Professor (Agricultural Economics)
 Tamil Nadu Rice Research Institute (TRRI)
 Aduth
urai, Tamil Nadu, India
 (Corresponding author:  krkaruna@gmail.com
)  S. Nedumaran
 Research Program 
Œ Markets, Institutions and Policies
 International Crop Research Insitute for the Semi
-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)
 Patancheru, Hyderabad, India
 (s.nedumaran@cgiar
.org)
   M. Chandrasekaran
 Professor 
(Agricultural Economics)
 Center for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies (CARDS)
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University
 Coimbatore, India
 (mcsekaran@gmail.com)
 1  Is 
the 
current land use pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani Basin 
of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
   K. R. Karunakaran
 Associate Professor (Agricultural Economics)
 Tamil Nadu Rice Research Institute (TRRI)
 Aduth
urai, Tamil Nadu, India
 (Corresponding author:  krkaruna@gmail.com
)  S. Nedumaran
 Research Program 
Œ Markets, Institutions and Policies
 International Crop Research Insitute for the Semi
-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)
 Patancheru, Hyderabad, India
 (s.nedumaran@cgiar
.org)
   M. Chandrasekaran
 Professor 
(Agricultural Economics)
 Center for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies (CARDS)
 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University
 Coimbatore, India
 (mcsekaran@gmail.com)
 2  Is 
the 
current land use
 pattern 
in crop agriculture 
is 
sustainable in 
the 
Bhavani 
Sub
-Basin of So
uthern India?
: Application of 
a Bi
o-economic model
  Abstract
 Efficient and sustainable utilization of resources
, particularly land and water resource
s for agriculture 
have
 occupied the centre stage in the economic ag
enda of a nation. The regional resource availability
 and the 
 biotic, abiotic and socio
-economic constraints 
are 
largely 
varied in the any crop production system of 
that
 region. The integration of sustainable resource use with the production 
programs 
and i
ncome as objective
s of farming 
thus
, 
leads to a multiple objective
-planning framework. 
Attaining sustainable 
increase in 
agriculture production by considering the biophysical variability of the region without affecting the natural 
resources base is 
therefo
re 
very important to 
achieve
 food security for 
the growing population
 in a 
developing country situation
. The current study is to develop appropriate 
land use pattern in crop agriculture
 for sustainable land and water use to the agricultural 
development in the 
Bavani Basin
 of 
western zone of 
Tamil Nadu
 state 
in southern India
, 
using 
a multiple goal 
linear programming approach.
 Bhavani basin in the 
western zone of Tamil Nadu
 - one of the most diversified in bio physical feature
s, was evaluated 
in this study.
 The 
land use model 
 employed in the study following 
 the bio
-economic model by Shiferaw and Holden, 
(2003) 
who 
incorporated 
the 
important variations in the biophysical system (land and soils) and 
market characteristics. 
This study 
traced th
e alternative cropping pattern which 
would 
maximize
s the farm 
net income 
at a relatively lower water requirement, 
lower land requirement (
hectare days to ensure 
relatively more fallow period 
to lower land exhaustion rate) 
and that would lower the environme
nt damage 
in-terms of lower Environmental Impact Quotient (EIQ) 
with the given land and ground water availability of 
each identified ten homogen
eous land units
 beside the len
gth of growing period determined on the basis of 
quantum
 and distribution of rainf
all and temperature
.  The major biophysical factor
s considered 
beside
 the 
land availability, ground and surface water availability
 were;
 crop suitability for the particular soil type, crop 
sequence and climatic variations and these factors were specified a
s constrain
ts in the land use model. The 
input data for the model 
were collected from 
the 
sample respondents in the 
delineated homogen
eous land 
units. The actual water availability for each standard week (t) was estimated after adjusting the effective 

rainfall received during the period of crop stand from the total water requirement of each crop activity.  
 The land use model 
estimats 
reveal
ed the
 possibility of increasing the crop income fr
om 
the 
current level of 
INR
 6.14 billion to 
INR 
8.25 b
illion annually
. This alternative crop plan also helped to reduce the area under 
high water consuming crop
s in water deficit area
s.  3   INTRODUCTION
 Economic development and human welfare largely depend on optimum utilization of natural resources. 
There exist
s a wide spatial diversity in quantity and quality of land and water resources 
available 
and 
their 
efficiency in use for agricultural and non
-agricultural purposes. Efficiency and sustainability paradigms have 
therefore occupied the centre stage in the econ
omic agenda of a nation. A large proportion of India™s land 
shows clear evidence of advanced and continuous degradation, threatening to undermine the capacity to 

increase food production and alleviate rural poverty (Abrol, 1994). Despite the critical situa
tion, the increase 

in population led to decline the per capita availability of net sown area from 1.76 ha in 1950
-51 to 0.
11 ha
 in 
Tamil Nadu in India
 in 
2007
-200
8. On the other hand, the water availability for agriculture from both surface 
and ground wate
r sources 
was 
not able to meet the increasing demand by the changing cropping pattern and 
climatic variability. Annual internal renewable water resources in India fell by 652 cubic meter (cum)  per 

capita  in about 12 years i.e., from 1896 cum in 1988 to 1
244 cum in 2000 (HDR, 2000). The ground water 
estimation committee (1994) estimated the annual replenishable ground water potential to be 431 bcm and 

the ultimate irrigation potential in terms of area was estimated to be 80.38 mha. During the period from 
1984
-85 to 1998
-99, the number of dark
1 blocks (administrative unit consists of few villages) had increased 
from 253 to 428 at the national level. If this trend continues, the number of overexploited blocks would be 
doubled over a period of every twelve and
 half years (Swaminathan, 2002). In the State of Tamil Nadu the 
groundwater was over exploited in 54 bocks
 out of a total of 
385
-blocks
 which spread over in 16 districts 
(CWC, 2000). 
 
The integration of sustainable resource use with the production programs
 and income as objectives of 
farming thus, leads to a multiple objective
-planning framework. Attaining sustainable increase in agriculture 
production by considering the biophysical variability of the region without affecting the natural resources 

base is t
herefore very important to 
achieve
 food security for the growing population in a developing country 
situation. 
In 
such a 
situation
, there is an urgent need to identify concrete policy measures that would permit 
a simultaneous improvement of agricultural pr
oduction and conservation of natural resource base especially 

land and water resources. 
 Tamil Nadu 
state in 
southern 
India 
is divided into seven agro climatic zones based on rainfall distribution, 
irrigation pattern, soil characteristics, cropping pattern
, ecological and social characteristics. Among these 
seven zones, the Western zone consisting of Coimbatore and Erode districts 
covering Bhavani basin
 occupies 
12.03 per cent of the state
™s
 geographical area and 11.45 per cent of the state
™s
 net sown area.
 This zone 
accounts for 
close to 15 per cent of degraded land in the State. The western zone receives the lowest annual 

rainfall of 700 mm compared to the 959 mm for the State. Beside
s, well irrigation is 
the pre
domina
nt source 
of irrigation in this zone a
ccounting 
for 
about 53 per
 cent of total irrigated area. The depth of the water 
in 
this zone however, 
has fallen between 6 meters and 49.3 m
eters
 in the 
rainfall deficit years
 when the
 annual 
                                                 1 Dark block are were the groundwater extraction is more than recharge
 4  rainfall 
was 
around 450 mm. Due to poor maintenance and reductio
n 
in 
storage capacity of tanks, ponds and 
other small reservoirs 
also 
affect the groundwater recharge in th
is zone. The over extraction of groundwater 
and inefficient use of irrigation
 water
 for crops 
also 
leads to faster reduction in groundwater table. 
The current study therefore
 aims 
to answer the 
following 
question confronting the stakeholders in the region 
namely:
 1. What would be the optimal land allocation to different crop activities 
that will maximize the net 
farm income
 with the available 
land, 
water 
and environmental resources 
in 
the region?
  The overall objective of the study is to develop appropriate 
land use pattern in crop agriculture
 for 
sustainable land and water use to the agricultural development in the 
Bhavani basin of the 
west
ern zone of 
Tamil Nadu. 
 2. METHODOLOGY
 In India, private property right for land will leads to over exploitation of land, water other resources which 
causing spatial and temporal damages.  This study is indent to identify the land allocation pattern to th
e different crops and how the different resources or inputs like labour, water and credit are judiciously used to 

reach the maximum net return with the available production activities in the context of sustainability. In 
order to achieve the sustainability
 in land and water resources use, the spatial variability on bio
-physical 
characters must be considered. This would be achieved by 
identifying
 the homogeneous land which having 
same bio
-physical features of surface water availability, ground water status a
nd climatic feature like 
temperature, rainfall and Length of Growing period (LGP). 
 Land Use Model
 Land use studies dealing with the future prospects are generally of two types
 - predictive and explorative. 
The 
explorative land use studies focus more on de
fining the range of developmental possibilities at different 
scale (Van Ittersum 
et al
., 1998). These studies emphasized the biophysical possibilities, assuming that 
socioeconomic constraints could be managed in the long run (Van Keulen et al., 2000). Bio
-economic 
modeling (BEM) approach was used to analyze the combined effect of land degradation, population growth, 
market imperfections and increased risk of drought on household production, welfare and food security 
(Holden and Shiferaw, 2002). They used dy
namic non
-separable household model which maximized the 
household welfare. 
 The 
land use model
 employed in this study following 
the bio
-economic model by Shiferaw and Holden, 
(2003) 
which 
incorporated 
the 
important variations in the biophysical system (lan
d and soils) and market 
characteristics. 
Loborte et. al.(2009) dev
eloped and evaluated the methodology for exploring the lan
ds use 
option at s
ub national level to improve the scientific basis for lands use planning which 
provide
d the 
facilities 
for land ev
aluation for resource availability, scenario construction and land use optimization. 
Following the 
methodology t
his study
 would 
trace the alternative cropping pattern which maximizes the farm net income 
5  with the given land and ground water availability of
 each identified ten homogen
eous land units
 (HLUs)
.  The 
land and water availability of the each 
HLU
s were taken as constrain
ts. The actual crop water availability for 
each standard week (t) was estimated after adjusting the effective 
rainfall received during the period of crop 
stand from the total crop water requirement of each crop activity. 
 Input
-output coefficients
 The input
-output coefficients for the land use model were estimated from
 a sample
 of 
330 farm households  
spread in 22
 villages covering all identified 10 land units. 
The distribution of the sample households among 
the 10 
HLU
s is presented in Table 1. 
 Table 1 Distribution of Sample village in different land units
 Land Unit Classification
 Land units
 Geo area
 Selected villages
 ID Number
 area (ha)
 % share
 CBE
 Erode
 WZ Non ayacut critical average LGP
 0CA
 1 128370
 10.92
 1  1 Non ayacut over
-exploited average LGP
 0OA
 2 303836
 25.84
 2 3 5 Non ayacut 
Œsemi
-critical
- average LGP
 0RA
 3 182576
 15.53
  3 3 Non ayacut semi
-critical good LGP
 0RG
 4 32893
 2.80
  1 1 Non ayacut safe average LGP
 0SA
 5 46785
 3.98
  1 1 Ayacut critical average LGP
 1CA
 6 39362
 3.35
 1  1 Ayacut critical good LGP
 1CG
 7 36016
 3.06
 1  1 Ayacut over exploited average LGP
 1OA
 8 78946
 6.72
 2  2 Ayacut semi
-critical average LGP
 1RA
 9 280800
 23.88
 2 3 5 Ayacut safe average LGP
 1SA
 10 46061
 3.92
  2 2 Total  map area
 1175645
 (75.40)
 100
 9 13 22 Reserved Forest (RF)
 387625
 (24.60)
     Total Geographical area
 1563270
 (100)
      The land uni
t 0OA
- Non ayacut 
over exploited with average LGP less than 70 days of LGP without surface 
water facility is spread over 3.
03 lakh ha which constituted 
25.84 per cent of the total geographical area of 
the western zone (11,75, 645 ha which excluded 
the reserved forest area). This is followed by the land unit 
1RA
- Ayacut 
semi
-critical with average LGP with surface water facility which occupied about 2.80 lakh ha 
(23.88 per cent of total area).
 The field survey was conducted during 2006 and the farm da
ta were collected on recall basis for the normal 
year 
(2004
-05).  Primary data covering land use, cropping pattern, cultivation practices, irrigation, depth of 
water table in the tube and open wells, well output, human
 labour
, animal and machine 
power 
used
, 
chemical and other inputs used, crop outputs, input and output prices 
paid and 
received by farmers 
respectively 
and other household and farm details were collected from the selected sample farms through 
a well
-structured pre tested questionnaire. The inp
ut use and outputs 
obtained 
for different crop activities 
were varying for each 
of the 
HLUs
 and 
over seasons
. The inputs required for cropping activities such as 
fertilizer (N, P and K
 nutrients
), water, pesticides and other expenses 
on labour, bullock and 
 6   Figure 
1: Homogenous land units of Bhavani basin in Western zone of Tamil Nadu, southern India
 Note: The land 
units are designated with three character codes.  The first character 1 or 0 indicates ayacut (irrigated) 
and non
-ayacut (un
-irrigated); the second character O, C, R & S  refer to grounds water categories namely; over
-exploited, critical, semi
-critical and
 safe, respectively; the third character A or G represents Length of growing period
 with < 70 and >70 Days, respectively.
   7  machine power were considered.   From this 
data set, 
cost (operational cost) and returns were estimated for 
the crops
 raised in the 
identified 
HLUs
.  2.2 Static Land Use model
 The indices used in the land use model are given in Table 
2. Table 
2 Indices and Abbreviations used in defining Land Use Model
 Index
 types 
 Characters considered
 z Homogenous land units
 (HL
U)
 (10
 HLUs
) LGP, ground water, surface water 
availability and length of growing 
period 
used to delineate  HLU
s  t Time (52 standard weeks)
 Land and ground water availability for each HLU were estimated for 
each standard week. 
 c crops (26)
 19 irrigated 
crops (i)
 7 rainfed crops (r)
 Crop
s in the different 
HLUs
: The composition of different crops in 
vary spaciously
 depend
ing
 on the agro
-climatic suitability, 
marketing feasibility and technology availability for the region. 
However, 26 crop
s covering cereal
s (5), pulses (
1), oilseeds (3), 
fiber
(1)
, tuber (1), sugar crop (1), spices (2)
, fruits (1),
 vegetables 
(3) and narcotics were considered in the model.
 Cereals: Kuruvai and samba rice,  maize (
I & r)   finger millet  and 
grain 
sorghum (
i & r)
, 
fodder 
sorg
hum ( r)
 Pulses: Pulses (
 i & r) 
 Oilseeds: groundnut (
I & r), gingelly (i& r) and sunflower
 Fiber: Cotton (
I & r)
 Fruits: banana;                       Tuber: tapioca
 Sugar: sugarcane;                   Spices: turmeric and chilly
 Vegetables: onion, Brinj
al, tomato
 Narcotics: tobacco
 (Note: 
Trees :coconut and other tree cropped area excluded from 
the land availability
) Note: 
I - irrigated; r
- rainfed
 2.2.1 Objective Functions: Maximizing Net Income
 In this 
study a
 regional level explorative land allocatio
n model
 was
 developed 
which 
would 
maximize  net 
income from crop enterprise
s in the region. Income from each 
crop 
activity was the major factor that would 
determine the selection of crops. Thus, the objective function was maximization of net income from cr
op 
enterprise in the model. 
  Max  
,,x zczc
zccincNIvArc
    ,,,
zczczc
NIGIopC

 Where 
  cinc
      
: Crop enterprise net income
  ,zcvArc
: The level of crop activity ‚c™  in HLU ‚z™
  GI
z,c
         : Gross 
revenue from crop activity ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
  ,zcopC :  Operational cost for crop activity ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™ and
 8  ,zcNI : Net crop income per hectare from crop activity (difference between the gross revenue and 
operational
 expenditure of crop production). The operational cost per ha did not include the fixed costs and 
land rent.
 2.2.2 Constraints
 The net arable land availability (excluding area under coconut and other tree crops) and the availability of 
ground water were co
nsidered as constraints besides the fodder production in the model. The surface water 
feature was incorporated in the HLU classification through GIS technique.
 Agricultural Land Area:         
  , x ztzcz
ctacvArca
 Where
 ztac: The land area requirement for each crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™ at time period ‚t™. The land requirement was 
derived considering the crop suitability and sowing season conditional matrices derived from the 

discussion from the experts and secondary sources.
 ,zcvArc
: The level of crop activity ‚c™ in each HLU ‚z™ and
 za total land availability in each HLU ‚z™ after adjusting the area for perennial 
trees 
like coconut and 
other tree
s not included as crop activities.
 Water availa
bility constraint:
 ,,x ziczic
zt
ctwnnvArctw
 Where
 ,zcArc
: The level of crop activity
 ‚c™ 
in each HLU ‚z™
  ,zic
wnn
: The total actual water need for irrigated crop activity ‚ic™ in each HLU ‚z™. The water need was 
cal
culated considering the availability of weekly effective rainfall and ground water availability and 

recommended water requirement of each crop activity.
 tWzt          
:  zone wise water availability for standard week t
, considering both surface and groundw
ater 
availability for each HLUs for each standard weeks.
 Actual Crop Water Requirement
 The actual water needs for each crop was calculated considering the moisture availability through the 
effective rainfall during the stand of the particular crop. The equ
ation is given as
 ,zcc
zcwnnWreffRf

 where
 ,zcwnn
: Actual water required for each crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
 cWr : recommended water requirement for crop ‚c™ and
 9  zceffRf
 : Total soil moisture a
vailable through effective rainfall for zone‚z™ for crop ‚c™.
 Effective Rainfall
 The moisture availability through effective rainfall (
zteffRft
) for each HLU ‚z™ in time period ‚t™ was 
calculated by adding the daily rainfall in each HLU ‚
z™ (more than 2.5 mm and less than 50 mm per day). It 
was assumed that only 60 per cent of total rainfall reaches soil profile and the remaining 40 per cent drained 
out through runoff and seepage. Then, the crop wise moisture availability through effective
 rainfall was 
estimated by adding these for respective weeks of crop stand in that location. The equation is as follows:
 ,,,zc
zttceffRfeffRf
 Bio-physical Constraints: Soil Series and Crop Suitability
 Soil quality based crop suitability was incorpora
ted in each HLU, based on the soil characters as constraint. 
The crop suitability constraint is specified as follows:
 ,,,
 x  zczczc
ArcBpSuit
 where
 Arc
zc
   :decision variable; area to be allocated for crop ‚c™ in zone ‚z™
 BP
zc
  :Crop ‚c™ can be cultiva
ted in zone ‚z™ as 1 and 0 other wise; included as land suitability matrix
 Suit
zc
 :  total area suitable for crop ‚c™ in HLU ‚z™
 2.3 Land and Water Resources Efficiency Analysis
 Cropping Intensity (CI)
 was calculated as the perc
entage of gross cropped area (GCA) to the total cultivable 
land area available for cultivation (LA).
  *100GCA
CILA  Based on Subbian et al. (1999) Cumulative Land Utilization Index (CLUI) 
was calculated by summing the 
products of land area pl
anted to each crop and the actual duration of that crop in weeks and dividing this by 
the total cultivable land area times weeks. 
 1*52
nii
iadCULI
LA*100
 where 
 CLUI
 - Cumulative land utilization index in per cent
  ai - area occupied by the i
th cro
p di -  weeks that i
th crop occupied
 n - total number of crops
 LA - total 
cultivatble 
land area available in a year 
 10  The CLUI 
would 
reach 
the 
maximum of 100 per cent when all 
the 
available land area was occupied by 
different
 crops throughout the year. 
Lesser CLUI with low level of water use that could generate maximum 
net income is preferred for 
land and water resources sustainability.
  Water Use Efficiency (WUE)
 is the ratio between the total net return realized from the irr
igated crop to total 
water used by the crop plan. 
  WUE
NIWU Where
  WUE
 - Water use efficiency rupees per thousand liter of water
 NI
 - Total net income realized from the irrigated crops in the optimal plan in 
INR
 WU
 - Total water used 
by the crop plan in thousand liters
 Considering the complexity of the present static land use model for 10 different 
HLU
s, the General Algebraic 
Modeling System (GAMS 22.9, 2009) was used for developing the land use model. The model con
sist
ed of 
260 (10x26) crop activities with 520 (10x 26 x 2) equations each for land and water resources, 260 (10x24) 
equations for crop suitability constraints. Thus, totally 260 activities and 1040 constraints besides the non
-zero equations were used in f
ormulating the land use model and solved 
using
 GAMS. 
 3. Results and Discussion
 The results and discussions 
included
; the 
descri
ption
 the land area availability, delineation of the 
homogenous land units
, followed by the model results
.   The 
Bhavani 
basin of 
western zone of Tamil Nadu was divided into 10 agro
-ecological 
HLU
s by overlaying the 
three spatial attributes 
namely;
 (i)
availability of surface irrigation, (command area map)
; (ii)
 ground water 
categorization based on the ext
raction 
levels of ground water; 
and 
(iii) 
the climatic feature (by developing 
the length of growing period 
- LGP) using GIS overlay technique and the same is presented in the map (Figure 
1). 
 3.1 
General 
Characteristics
 of the sample farms
 identified 
in th
e HLUs 
 The farm and famer™s 
general 
characters such as
; farm size, family size, main and secondary occupation, 
family labour availability for farm operation were analyzed fr
om the sample data collected for each 
of the 
HLUs.
 The average farm size was 0.72, 1.64 and 4.95 ha for marginal, small and medium to large size farm 
categories, respectively. The marginal and small farmers constituted about 59 per cent of the total number
 of 
sample operational holdings in the 
Bhvani basin of 
western zone 
in Tamil Nadu 
and they operated only 15 
per cent of the cultivable area. The average family size in different farm size groups ranged from 4.00 

(marginal farms) to 4.68 members per family 
(in large farms) in which children constituted 15.19 per cent of 

the family size. Male members engaged in agricultural operations constituted 73 per cent, whereas, two 
thirds of the females were engaged in the agricultural operations. 
 11  3.2 Operational Expe
nditure for Major Crops 
under Homogenous Land Units 
 The operational expenditure for cultivating major crops in the western zone was estimated from the sample 
farms 
(Table 3) 
to derive the net income per hectare realized from each crop in each 
of the HLUs
. The 
operational expenditure includes all the paid out cost on inputs except the fixed cost
. The results indicated 
that the operational cost was the highest for sugarcane (
INR
 59484 per ha.) followed by 
INR
 58385, 
INR
 51864, 
INR
 43893 and 
INR
 28528 per ha for banana, turmeric, tapioca and groundnut, respectively. The 
cultivation expenses of kharif paddy was 
INR
 19027 while for rabi paddy it was 
INR
17840 per ha. Among 
different homogenous land units, farmers incurred marginally higher operatio
nal expenses in ayacut land 
units
 (irrigated) 
such as; 1CA, 1OA, 1RA, 1SA and ICG for most of the crops; this may be due to higher use of 
inputs to achieve the targeted yield with the limited resources
. Table 
3 Operational Expenditure for cultivating diffe
rent crops under different land units
            (INR
/ha)
 Crop
 Non
 Ayacut Land units
 Ayacut Land units
 ALL
 CV %
  0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
   PADk
 17900
 18683
 18579
 19597
 17600
 18472
 18300
 2280
0 19560
 18248
 19002
 19582
 19027
 7.76
 PADr
 19248
 18579
 16579
 16579
 16579
 17513
 19001
 1600
2 1900
2 18579
 18248
 18166
 17840
 7.01
 RAG 6570
 6800
 5740
       6370
 6300
       5800
    6050
 6242
 7.47
 MAZ
 10400
 8400
 9490
 9620
 10300
 9642
 10900
 11100
 10960
 10650
 10200
 10762
 10202
 8.14
 PUL
 7420
 8940
 7680
 8400
    8110
 9400
 8670
 9420
 8720
 8470
 8936
 8569
 7.97
 GNT
 27694
 28577
 27274
 29274
 27274
 28019
 27373
 28311
 27229
 32694
 29577
 29037
 28527
 5.95
 GIN
 11200
 8400
 9490
 12590
 11300
 10596
 12000
    10900
 11100
 11400
 11350
 10931
 11.59
 COT
 24894
 28894
 28894
 25416
 25416
 26703
 25416
    31838
 31838
 31838
 30233
 28272
 10.82
 SCN
 62721
 61752
 62760
 63617
 63617
 62893
 62550
 57749
 51759
 56874
 51443
 56075
 59484
 8.01
 TUR
 57010
 54142
 62017
 51877
 48900
 54789
 49190
    53928
 41148
 48560
 48207
 51864
 11.42
 TOB
 18330
 13356
 19500
    17867
 17263
 18900
    19720
 18718
 19503
 19210
 18237
 11.36
 TAP
 40014
 40241
 44100
 43821
 37560
 41147
 44604
   48096
 48092
 48506
 47325
 43893
 9.03
 ONI
 25776
 24426
 22446
 25668
 23850
 24433
 20466
   22284
 20502
 21006
 21065
 22936
 9.12
 BAN
 53997
 49778
 58993
 60668
 60668
 56821
 58993
 59707
 60668
 59707
 60668
 59949
 58385
 6.21
 SFL
 13200
    12400
 13600
    13067
 14200
       11400
 12300
 12633
 12850
 7.87
 BRJ
 24370
 24370
 23900
 22590
 24500
 23946
 21500
 23600
 21700
 2320
0 21500
 22300
 23123
 5.28
 TOM
 17600
 16800
 16200
 15690
 17400
 16738
 16500
 15690
 14620
 13000
 16500
 15262
 16000
 8.54
 CHI
 23800
 24900
 22420
 21300
 22700
 23024
 24000
 23000
 22100
 25420
 21300
 23164
 23094
 6.13
 r_GN
 6590
 5175
 5687
 5144
 5125
 5544
 5233
 5061
 5175
 5687
 5144
 5260
 5402
 8.79
 r_GI
 4908
 4740
 4460
 4600
    4677
 4678
 4897
 4960
 3670
 3987
 4438
 4544
 9.75
 r_CO
 7830
 6530
 6520
    5900
 6695
       6590
 5860
 4984
 5811
 6316
 13.88
 r_MZ
 6700
 5800
 5060
 5902
    5866
 5830
 5740
 5120
 6200
 6300
 5838
 5850
 9.01
 r_fC
    3900
 2800 3400
    3367
       3800
 2750
    3275
 3330
 16.23
 r_CH
 4200
 3800
 4280
 4300
    4145
 4140
 4300
 4300
 4800
    4385
 4265
 6.43
 r_PL
 5621
 5556
 4956
 6090
 5402
 5525
 4981
 5291
 5417
 5290
 5920
 5380
 5452
 6.66
 Source: Estimated from farm sample
   12  3.3 Productivity of
 major Crops u
nder Homogenous Land Units 
 The productivity of major crops was estimated and the results would reveal that the average productivity of 
kharif paddy, rabi paddy, ragi and maize was 
52, 40, 30 and 29 qt
l/ha,
 respectively. The district average
 yield 
of these crops were 
33.11,
 29.06, 23.8 and 11.25 qtl per 
ha 
in Coimbatore district and 39.6, 41.65, 23.8 and 
22.8 qtl per ha f
or Erode district, respectively. The average yield of sugarcane (as main crop) was 108
0 qtl
/ha. 
While, the district average
 productivity of sugarcane was 87
0 and 102
0 qtl
/ha in Coimbatore and Erode 
districts
, respectively
. The variation in crop productivity among the land units was however less as revealed 
from the coefficient of variation with exception of 37 per cent of CV f
or rainfed maize
. 3.4 Net Income of Major Crops in Different Homogenous Land Unit Categories 
 The net income over the operational cost was estimated for the major crops in each 
of the HLUs 
and the 

result showed that turmeric recorded the maximum net income
 of 
INR 
71848 per ha over operational cost, 
followed by banana (
INR
. 70827) and sugarcane (
INR
. 46767). The low water consuming crops 
yielded net 
returns 
as follows
; cotton (
INR
. 13265), groundnut (
INR
. 44181), maize (
INR
. 10021) and onion (
INR
. 55762). 
In the ayacut land units (1CA, 1OA, 1RA, 1SA and ICG), the net return realized were comparatively higher at 
INR
 16679 vs 11296 for kharif paddy, 
INR
 8842 vs 
INR
. 6899 for rabi paddy, 
INR
 48433 vs 39928 for 
groundnut, 79050  vs 66086 for turmeric and 
INR
. 581
23 vs 35411 for sugarcane. The net income realized in 
each crop activity 
was considered in the land use model.
 3.5 Current Cropping Pattern in Different 
HLUs
  The alternative crop sets were optimize using the static land use model by using linear programmi
ng 
(LP) approach for each homogeneous land units with given land and water resource availability. In the land 

availability constraints 1.92 
lakh
 ha was excluded which covers area under Tamarind, Guava, Mango, 
Coconut, Tea and Coffee. Similarly, the net gro
und water availability was estimated with the average pump 
output, well output in liter per second in each homogeneous land units for 52 standard weeks. 
The current 

cropping pattern revealed,
 after excluding area under perennial crops
/trees
, 17 major crops
 were cultivated 
in different 
HLUs
 of about 4.45 lakh ha in 2004
-05. In order to understand the current status of the present 
cropping pattern, various efficiency indicators such as cropping intensity, cumulative land utilization index, 
share of the high a
nd low water consuming crops, commercial crops, rainfed crops and area under vegetable
 crops
 were 
aggregated 
for each 
HLU
 and the results are presented in Table 
4. The analysis presented in 
Table 
4 would show that
 paddy was cultivated 
in 
little
 over 
58,000
 ha followed by 
maize and sugarcane 
with
 30281
 ha
 and 25831 ha, respectively under irrigated condition. Groundnut, 
sorghum, pulses and fodder sorghum were the major rainfed crops 
that 
constituted 43
-57 per cent of 
cropped area. Groundnut cover
ed 47530 ha, 
next to sorghum
 with 91500 ha
. The fodder sorghum occupied 
52300 
ha. The cropping intensity was relatively high in 1OA, 1CA followed by 1CG under ayacut land units 
(133, 120 and 119 per cent
, respectively) 
whereas;
 it was 123, 128 and 105 under Non
-Ayacut (0RG, 0CA, 
0RA) land units. However cumulative land utilization index was relatively less in irrigated land units 
at 
38 per 
13  cent compared to 46 per cent in Non
-ayacut units. It 
would also be surprising
 to note that the area under 
high water consumi
ng crop
s (paddy, banana, turmeric
, tobacco 
and sugarcane) constituted almost 65 per 
cent of the area in non
-ayacut land units but it was around 31 per cent in ayacut land units. This need
ed 
 to 
be 
watched 
in terms
 of changes 
in the alternative crop set
 as we aim at a sustainable cropping pattern in this 
analysis
. Rainfed crops normally dominated in non ayacut land units. 
 Table 
4 Distribution of crops under current cropping pattern in ha*
 Crops
 Non Ayacut area
 land unit
 Ayacut area
 land units
 WZ 0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All 
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
 PADk
 2076
 3977
 1504
 181
 553
 8291
 183
  185
 4004
 424
 4796
 13087
 PADr
 12738
 9142
 8080
 665
 1242
 31867
 2655
 468
 1024
 8685
 290
 13122
 44989
 RAG
 15 18 84   117
 5   70  75 191
 MAZ
 1757
 2130
 5589
 44 146
 9666
 6553
 434
8 1005
 7668
 1042
 20616
 30281
 PUL
 236
 785
 351
 37  1409
 58  168
 336
 139
 701
 2110
 GNT
 899
 2357
 3679
 189
 348
 7472
 369
 685
 1345
 5207
 1198
 8804
 16276
 GIN
 2552
 5107
 1605
 98 793
 10155
   183
 2653
 1288
 4124
 14280
 COT
 143
 1454
 1142
 56 297
 3092
 4  249
 1937
 1329
 3519 6610
 SCN
 4128
 4763
 7636
 260
 789
 17576
 715
 1238
 194
 5733
 375
 8255
 25831
 TUR
 2369
 3664
 1692
 71 264
 8060
 114
  128
 1449
 96 1787
 9847
 TOB
 1564
 206
 794
  454
 3018
   9 459
 112
 580
 3599
 TAP
 280
 1379
 600
  273
 2532
   44 825
 287
 1156
 3687
 ONI
 306
 1043
 625
 6 23 2003
 433
  119
 621
 38 1211
 3212
 BAN
 3787
 4413
 1208
 31 1212
 10651
 231
 30 119
 1054
 151
 1585
 12236
 SFL 170
  580
 37  787
 45   1043
 34 1122
 1909
 BRJ
 75 389
 132
 7 1 604
 16 55 22 127
 54 274
 878
 TOM
 237
 1328
 220
 8 2 1795
 85 119
 607
 352
 114
 1277
 3072
 CHI
 254
 447 331
 18 73 1123
 120
 31 174
 364
 5 694
 1817
 r_GN
 8408
 8703
 10861
 800
 3766
 32538
 6  3261
 11607
 118
 14992
 47530
 r_GI
 38 1826
 705
   2569
 19 155
 276
 973
  1423
 3991
 r_CO
 618
 7019
 44   7681
 213
  1790
 555
  2558
 10239
 r_MZ
 692
 1267
 3277
 13  5249
 160
 398
 1269
 3088
  4915
 10164
 r_FC
 10484
 13627
 14068
   38179
   701
 13422
  14123
 52302
 r_CH
 12043
 40524
 8289
 206
  61062
 1955
 2536
 10831
 15132
  30454
 91515
 r_PL
 4074
 10724
 1635
 115
 48 16596
 4171
 4589
 6020
 3937
 85 18802
 35398
 GCA 69940 126292 74731 2841 10284 284088
 18110 14651 29723 91302 7179 160965
 445051 NSA
 54710 120288 71366 2311 24774 273449
 15036 12280 22310 94147 14953 158726
 432175 CI
 127.84
 104.99
 104.72
 122.92
 41.51
 103.89
 120.44
 119.31
 133.22
 96.98
 48.01
 101.41
 102.98
 CLUI
 59.08
 44.44
 47.81
 55.98
 21.79
 45.82
 44.02
 42.20
 45.85
 40.99
 21.27
 38.87
 44.06
 LWC
 25.27
 39.06
 43.88
 29.31
 37.26
 34.956
 66.35
 75.10
 70.42
 50.87
 80.84
 68.72
 45.34
 HWC
 74.73
 60.94
 56.12
 70.69
 62.74
 65.044
 33.65
 24.90
 29.58
 49.13
 19.16
 31.28
 54.66
 COM
 55.42
 48.40
 73.31
 57.63
 82.08
 63.368
 50.15
 48.18
 38.67
 64.77
 86.93
 57.74
 57.92
 ir_Sh
 48.02
 33.73
 47.97
 60.10
 62.91
 50.546
 63.98
 47.60
 18.76
 46.65
 97.18
 54.83
 43.57
 r_Sh
 51.98
 66.27
 52.03
 39.90
 37.09
 49.454
 36.02
 52.40
 81.24
 53.35
 2.82
 45.17
 56.43
 veg_Sh
 1.25
 2.54
 1.75
 1.36
 0.95
 1.57
 3.61
 1.40
 3.10
 1.60
 2.95
 2.532
 2.02
 Irrigated crops:  
PADk: Kharif paddy; PADr:Rabi Paddy; RAG:Rafi; MAZ:Maize; PUL:Pulses; GNT:Groundnut; GIN:Gingelly; 
COT:Cotton; SCN:Sugarcane; TUR:Turmeric; TOB:Tobaco; TAP:Tabioca; ONI:Onion; BAN:banana;SFL:Sunflower; 
BRJ:
brinjal; TOM:Tomato;  CHI:Chillies; 
 Rainfed crops
: r_GN:groundnut; r_GI:gingelly; r_CO:Cotton; r_MZ:Maize;  r_FC:fodder cholam; r_CH:cholam; r_PL:pulses
 14  Efficiency indicators
: CI: Cropping intensity; CLUI: Cumulative land utilization index; LWC: Low water
 consuming crops; 
HWC: High water consuming crop
 (Paddy, 
Sugarcane, Turmeric, Tobaco and Banana)
s; COM: Commercial crops; Ir_Sh: 
share of irrigated crops; r_Sh: Share of rainfed crops; veg_Sh: share of vegetables.
 (indicate what are HWC and LWC crops, 
also
 add 2 columns 
- total for non
-ayacut and total for ayacut
-also give %)
 The 
analysis of
 HLU
 wise cropping pattern clearly 
revealed the fact 
that the current cropping pattern is 
ground water exploit
ative in
 nature
, particularly 
in ground water deficit 
HLUs 
(0CA, 0OA, 1CA,1CG, 1OA)
, 
more specifically in the non
-ayacut areas where the high water consuming crops dominated and alternately 
in the ayacut areas
 with higher cropping intensity ranging f
rom 110 to 133 per cent
. This warrant
s optimizing 
the current cro
pping plan for simultaneous increase in net income 
while reducing
 the pressure on ground 
water use.
 3.6. 
Optimal (
Alternative
) Cropping Pattern
 The alternative crops set 
was identified using the static land use model and the same presented in Table 
5. The
 percentage change in area and income over the current plan for each crop activity w
as estimated and 
presented in Table 
6.  Table 
5. Optimal (
Alternative
) cropping pattern in Western zone in ha
       Crops
 Non ayacut land units
 Ayacut land units
 WZ 0CA
 0OA
 0RA
 0RG
 0SA
 All
 1CA
 1CG
 1OA
 1RA
 1SA
 All
 PADk
 3039
 6683
 3965
 128 1376
 15191
 835 682 1239
 5230
 831 8817
 24010
 PADr
 2188
 4812
 2855
 92 991 10938
 601 491 892 3766
 598 6348
 17287
 RAG
 3647
 8019
 4758   16424
 1002
   6276
  7278
 23703
 MAZ
 3218
 7076
 4198
 231 1304
 16027
 884 1228
 2231
 5538
 1495
 11376
 27404
 PUL
 5471
 12029
 7137
 122  24759
 1504
 646 1174
 9415
 787 13526
 38284
 GNT
 2879
 6331
 3756
 122 1077
 14165
 791 251 1174
 4955
 787 7958
 22124
 GIN
 2879
 6331
 3756
 100 506 13572
   970 4955
 650 6575
 20148
 COT
 2379
 5230
 3103
 47 563 11322
 654  455 4093
 305 5507
 16829
 SCN
 1117
 2455
 1456
 53 1304
 6385
 307 614 507 1921
 340 3689
 10073
 TUR
 1243
 2734
 1622
 51 551 6201
 342  1174
 2140
 787 4443
 10644
 TOB
 2879
 6331
 3756
  991 13957
   496 4955
 332 5783
 19741
 TA
P 1216
 2673
 1586
  476 5951
   892 2092
 598 3582
 9534
 ONI 2188
 4812
 2855
 122 1304
 11281
 601  429 3766
 288 5084
 16364
 BAN
 1052
 2313
 1372
 122 1239
 6098
 289  1174
 1811
 787 4061
 10159
 SFL 2879
  3756
 116  6751
 791   4955
 787 6533
 13285
 BRJ 2879
 6014
 3756
 116 1304
 14069
 791  1116
 4955
 748 7610
 21679
 TOM
 2735
 6014
 3568
 122  12439
 752  1174
 4707
 748 7381
 19821
 CHI
 2735
 6331
 3568
 128  12762
 752  1239
 4707
 787 7485
 20249
 r_GN
 2879
 6683
 3756
   13318
 791   4955
 831 6577
 19895
 r_GI
 3039
  3965
   7004
 835   5230
  6065
 13070
 r_CO
 2735
 6014
 3568
  1239
 13556
   1116
 4707
 748 6571
 20127
 r_MZ
 2879
 6331
 3756
 122  13088
 791 646 1174
 4955
 787 8353
 21442
 r_FC
  6331
 3756
   10087
   1174
 4955
  6129
 16216
 r_CH
 5471
 6331
 3756
 231  15789
   1174
 4955
  6129
 21918
 r_PL
  12029
 7137
   19166
   2231
 9415
  11646
 30811
 GCA
 63633
 139905
 90517
 2024
 14224
 310303
 13316
 4559
 23208
 119412
 14020
 174515
 484817
 NSA
 54710
 120288
 71366
 2311
 24774
 273449
 15036
 12280
 22310
 94147
 14953
 158726
 432175
 CI 116.31
 116.31
 126.84
 87.57
 57.41
 113.5
 88.56
 37.12
 104.02
 126.84
 93.76
 109.9
 115 CLUI
 46.44
 44.85
 48.56
 38.28
 30.25
 41.7 35.10
 15.51
 45.74
 48.56
 43.68
 37.7
 43.95
 15  LWC
 81.47
 80.25
 81.47
 73.29
 57.95
 74.9
 78.21
 54.31
 69.47
 81.47
 71.32
 71.0
 79.39
 HWC
 18.53
 19.75
 18.53
 26.71
 42.05
 25.1
 21.79
 45.69
 30.53
 18.53
 28.68
 29.0
 20.61
 COM
 68.86
 64.33
 67.29
 71.66
 83.36
 71.1
 70.39
 60.08
 71.08
 67.29
 84.20
 70.6
 65.95
 ir_Sh
 73.28
 68.75
 67.20
 82.57
 91.29
 76.6
 81.84
 85.82
 70.40
 67.20
 83.13
 77.7
 66.21
 r_Sh
 26.72
 31.25
 32.80
 17.43
 8.71
 23.4
 18.16
 14.18
 29.60
 32.80
 16.87
 22.3
 33.79
 veg_Sh
 16.56
 16.56
 15.19
 24.07
 18.33
 18.1
 21.75
 0.00
 17.06
 15.19
 18.33
 14.5
 13.30
 CI: Cr
opping intensity; CLUI: Cumulative land utilization index; LWC: Low water consuming crops; HWC: High 
water consuming crops; COM: Commercial crops; Ir_Sh: share of irrigated crops; r_Sh: Share of rainfed crops; 
veg_Sh: share of vegetables.
  Results presente
d in table 
5 table 
6 would show 
that the gross cropped area  increased 
by 
nine per cent over 
current plan and generated the net income of 
INR
 8.25 billion 
in the alternate plan 
compared to 
INR
 6.14 
billion under current plan
.  Area under l
ow water co
nsuming crops such as ragi, brinjal, irrigated pulses  and 
chillies increased more than 10 times while area under 
high water consuming crops like; 
rabi season paddy, 
sugarcane and banana ha
d reduced 
by 
more than 50 per cent over current plan
. The increase 
in net income
  over current crop plan 
was by 34 per cent.
  Table 
6. Changes in alternative plan over current cropping pattern and in Western Zone
 Crops
 Current cropping plan
 Alternative crop plan
 % increase over 
current plan
 Area
 income
 Area
 income
 Area
  income
 ha % L INR
 %  ha % L INR
 %  PADk
 13087
 2.94
 164
 2.67
 24010
 4.95
 304
 3.68
 83.46
 85.57
 PADr
 44989
 10.11
 506
 8.25
 17287
 3.57
 205
 2.49
 -61.58
 -59.44
 RAG
 191
 0.04
 2 0.04
 23703
 4.89
 274
 3.32
 12324
 11050
 MAZ
 30281
 6.80
 378
 6.15
 27404
 5.65
 345
 4.18
 -9.50
 -8.70
 PUL
 2110
 0.47
 42 0.68
 38284
 7.90
 800
 9.69
 1714.32
 1819.21
 GNT
 16276
 3.66
 699
 11.39
 22124
 4.56
 955
 11.57
 35.93
 36.61
 GIN
 14280
 3.21
 305
 4.97
 20148
 4.16
 476
 5.77
 41.09
 56.17
 COT
 6610
 1.49
 118
 1.92
 16829
 3.47
 291
 3.53
 154.60
 146.97
 SCN
 25831
 5.80
 1158
 18.86
 10073
 2.08
 407
 4.93
 -61.00
 -64.86
 TUR
 9847
 2.21
 482
 7.85
 10644
 2.20
 493
 5.97
 8.09
 2.33
 TOB
 3599
 0.81
 23 0.38
 19741
 4.07
 181
 2.19
 448.55
 671.02
 TAP
 3687
 0.83
 37 0.61
 9534
 1.97
 81 0.98
 158.57
 117.51
 ONI
 3212
 0.72
 79 1.29
 16364
 3.38
 417 5.06
 409.40
 428.92
 BAN
 12236
 2.75
 604
 9.84
 10159
 2.10
 396
 4.80
 -16.97
 -34.45
 SFL 1909
 0.43
 37 0.60
 13285
 2.74
 234
 2.84
 595.94
 538.08
 BRJ
 878
 0.20
 25 0.41
 21679
 4.47
 652
 7.90
 2369.14
 2468.18
 TOM
 3072
 0.69
 70 1.15
 19821
 4.09
 474
 5.75
 545.21
 574.86
 CH
I 1817
 0.41
 0 0.00
 20249
 4.18
 7 0.09
 1014.40
 3203.59
 r_GN
 47530
 10.68
 634
 10.33
 19895
 4.10
 297
 3.60
 -58.14
 -53.10
 r_GI
 3991
 0.90
 37 0.61
 13070
 2.70
 191
 2.31
 227.50
 411.84
 r_CO
 10239
 2.30
 93 1.52
 20127
 4.15
 225
 2.73
 96.57
 141.37
 r_MZ
 10164
 2.28
 45 0.73
 21442
 4.42
 100
 1.22
 110.96
 122.94
 r_FC
 52302
 11.75
 58 0.94
 16216
 3.34
 20 0.24
 -68.99
 -65.14
 r_CH
 91515
 20.56
 225
 3.67
 21918
 4.52
 47 0.57
 -76.05
 -79.27
 r_PL
 35398
 7.95
 317
 5.16
 30811
 6.36
 378
 4.58
 -12.96
 19.37
 GCA
 445051
 100
 6139
 100
 484817
 100
 8251
 100
.00
 8.93
 34.41
 NSA
 432175
    432175
       16  It could
 also
 be 
seen that
 the 
area under 
rabi season paddy 
decreased by about 62 per cent 
while 
a 83 per 
cent increase 
was noticed 
in kharif season paddy over current plan but
 overall
, the 
total 
paddy area has 
reduced from 0.58 
lakh
 ha to 0.42  
lakh 
ha. 
The paddy area rather evened out between the kharif and rabi 
seasons. The decline was more pronounced in the non
-ayacut HLUs, particularly in the greater ground water 
deficit ones. 
Among the other HWC crops, area
 under sugarcane and banana declined by 6
1.00 and 
16.97
 per 
cent respectively, while that of turmeric increased marginally by 
8.09
 per cent
 which 
may be due to higher 
net benefits
. Among the low 
water consuming crops, there was a marginal reduction in area under maize by 
9.50
 per cent, 
whereas
 area under crops like, groundnut, gingelly, cotton
 and tapioca increased considerably 
ranging from
 35.93 per cent to 154.60 per cent. In the case of ragi, tobacco, onion, sunflower
 and vegetables 
namely, 
brinjal, chilies and tomato, the increase was substan
tial ranging from 409.40 to 2369.14 per cent.
 Under rain fed conditions
, area under groundnut, 
grain sorghum, fodder sorghum,
 and pulses declined in the 
range of 12.96 to 76.05 per cent, whereas, area under gingelly, cotton and maize increased between 96.5
7 and 110.96 per cent. 
The inference is shift from high water consuming and rain fed crops to low water 
consuming and commercial crops including vegetables. 
A comparison of table 3 and table 4 would also show 
that the cropping intensity declined in the cri
tical, semi critical and over exploited HLUs
, whereas it increased 
in the safe HLUs. The CLUI also shown a decline in the critical and over exploited HLUs in terms of ground 
water, while overall it showed a marginal increase. All these are sign of a crop s
et that will sustain resource 
base and simultaneously help to increase the farm income substantially. 
 4 Conclusion and policy implication 
 The static land use model was developed with an intension to identify an alternative cropping plan which 

would take 
care of the land and water resource use sustainability besides maximizing net income from crop 

enterprise in 
the 
Bavani basin of the 
western zone of Tamil Nadu
 in southern India
. The land use model use
d the spatial variation in biophysical and socio
-economic variables of a region by incorporating spatial 
attributes of land and water resources. The major biophysical factor considered are the land availability, 
ground and surface water availability, crop suitability for the particular soil type, crop se
quence and climatic 
variations 
in terms of the length of growing period, 
and these factors were specified as the constrain
ts in the 
land use model. The input data for the model 
were collected from 
the delineated 
HLUs
. The 
optimum 
land 
use model reveals tha
t there is possibility of increasing the crop income 
in the upper Bhavani basin of 
western zone of Tamil Nadu 
form current level of 
INR
 6.14 billion to 
INR
 8.25 b
illion
. This alternative crop 
plan also helped to reduce the area under high water consumi
ng crop
s in water deficit area 
without
 affecting 
the land and water resources base.
 Thus
, it could be revealed from the land and water resource efficiency 
indicator
s for the alternative crop plan
, 
resulted
 sustai
nable resource use with higher net income
, 
achie
ved 
through
 the static bio
-economic model.
   17  Reference
 Abrol, I.P. Land Degradation
-A Challenge to Sustainability, In Salinity Management for Sustainable Agriculture 
(Eds) D.L.N. Rao, N.T. Singh, Raj K. Gupta and N.
T. Tyagi, (Karnal : Central Soil Salinity Research 
Institute, 1994)
 Central Water Commissions, 
Water and Related Statistics,
 New Delhi, 
2000.
 GAMS Development Corporation, 1998
 Washington, DC, 2000
7, USA Email. Sales@ games:
 http//www
/gams.com
 Holden, Stein., Hans Lofgren and Bekele Shiferaw ﬁEconomic Policy Reforms and Soil Degradation: A Village 
CGE Mode
l for a high Agricultural potential area with good market access in the Ethiopian Highland, 
2002.
 Human Development Report 2000, p.38. 
 Ittersum, M. K., Van R. Rabbinge and H.C.Van Latesteijn, ﬁExploratory Land Use Studies and their Role in 
Strategic Polic
y Makingﬂ, Agricultural System, 58:309
-330, 1998.
 Keulen, H.Van, M.K.Van Ittersum and N. De Ridder, ﬁNew approaches to land Use Planningﬂ in Eds 
R.P.Roeter, H.Van Keulen, A.G.Laborte, C.T.Hoanh and H.H. Van Laar, ﬁ System Research for 
Optimizing Future Lan
d Use in South and South
-East Asiaﬂ, SysNet Research Paper |Series No. 2, 
International Rice Research Institute, Los Boños, Philippines , 2000, pp: 3
-20. Subbian, P, K. Annadurai and S. P. Palaniappan. 
Agriculture 
- Facts and Figures
 (Luthiyana : Kalyani 
Publishers, 2000) pp 78
-81.
 Shiferaw Bekele and Stein T.Holden, ﬁFarm Level Benefits to Investments for Mitigating Land Degradation: 
Empirical Evidence from Ethiopiaﬂ, Environment and Development Economics, 6:335
-358, 2003
 Swaminathan, M.S., ﬁ
Agriculture an
d Allied Sectors
ﬂ Report of the Steering Group on for the Tenth Five Year 
Plan 2002
-2007, Tenth Five Year Plan / Steering Group Sr.No.13, 2002, p.14
  [![Return to
frontpage](http://www.thehindu.com/template/1-0-1/gfx/logo.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/)

[](https://twitter.com/The_Hindu)

[](https://plus.google.com/+thehindu)

[](https://www.facebook.com/thehindu)

[](https://instagram.com/the_hindu/?ref=badge)

[](https://www.youtube.com/user/The1878Hindu)

[](http://www.thehindugroup.in/subscribe/)

[](http://www.thehindu.com/apps/)

  * [Home](http://www.thehindu.com/ "Home, Popular, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Delhi, Mumbai, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Environment, Cinema, thREAD, Metroplus, Specials" )
    * [![A scene in Mayurimarg Hyderabad showing many vehicles partially submerged under flood waters. Photo: K.V.S. Giri](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Hyd_rains_3017628i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-throws-life-out-of-gear-in-hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Incessant rain throws life out of gear in
Hyderabad](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-
throws-life-out-of-gear-in-
hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, Minister for Irrigation M.B. Patil
and Minister for Home G. Parameshwara heading for a meeting to discuss Carvery
issue at Vidhana Soudha . Photo: V. Sreenivasa
Murthy](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/CM_3017744i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-issue-bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BJP to boycott all-party meet convened by
Siddaramaiah](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-issue-
bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka vehicles are not being allowed beyond Attibele check post. Photo:
K.C.
Deepika](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/Attibele_3016667i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-row-sc-directs-karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Cauvery Row: SC directs Karnataka to release 6,000 cusecs a day to Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-row-sc-directs-
karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Chennai   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/chennai/) [Hyderabad
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/) [Bengaluru
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/) [Delhi
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/) [Mumbai
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Andhra Pradesh
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/) [Environment
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/) [Cinema
|](http://www.thehindu.com/features/cinema/) [thREAD
|](http://www.thehindu.com/thread/) [Metroplus
|](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/) [Specials
](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/)

[Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" )

  * All Sections
    * News

[News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/)
[National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/)
[International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/) [Andhra
Pradesh](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/)
[Kerala](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/)
[Telangana](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other
states](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)
[Cities](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/)

Business

[Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/) [Agri-
Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/agri-business/)
[Economy](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/)
[Industry](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/)
[Markets](http://www.thehindu.com/business/markets/)

OP-ED

[Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/)
[Columns](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/)
[Editorial](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/)
[Interview](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/interview/) [Readers'
Editor](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/)

Resources

[Resources](http://www.thehindu.com/news/resources/) [The India
Cables](http://www.thehindu.com/news/the-india-cables/)
[Elections](http://www.thehindu.com/elections/)
[Topics](http://www.thehindu.com/topics/)

Events

[Lit for Life](http://www.thehindu.com/features/lit-for-life/) [November
Fest](http://www.thehindu.com/features/november-fest/)

Life & Style

[Entertainment](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/)
[Art](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-art/)
[Cinema](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-cinema/)
[Dance](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-dance/) [History &
Culture](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-history/)
[Music](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-music/)
[Theatre](http://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/entertainment-theatre/)
[Motoring](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/Motoring/)
[Travel](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/travel/)
[Books](http://www.thehindu.com/books/) [Literary
Review](http://www.thehindu.com/books/literary-review/) [Know Your
English](http://www.thehindu.com/books/know-your-english/)

Videos

[Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/)

Features

[Cinema](http://www.thehindu.com/features/cinema/)
[Downtown](http://www.thehindu.com/features/downtown/) [Education
Plus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/education/) [Friday
Review](http://www.thehindu.com/features/friday-review/)
[Magazine](http://www.thehindu.com/features/magazine/)
[Metroplus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/metroplus/) [Property
Plus](http://www.thehindu.com/features/homes-and-gardens/) [Young
World](http://www.thehindu.com/features/kids/) [In
School](http://www.thehindu.com/in-school/)
[Empower](http://www.thehindu.com/features/empower/)

Specials

[Specials](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/) [In
Depth](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/in-depth/) [Live
Chat](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/live-chat/)
[Timelines](http://www.thehindu.com/specials/timelines/)
[Data](http://www.thehindu.com/data/)

Sport

[Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/)
[Cricket](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/)
[Football](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/football/)
[Hockey](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/hockey/)
[Tennis](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/tennis/)
[Races](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/races/) [Other
Sports](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/)

Sci-Tech

[Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/)
[Environment](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/)
[Health](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/)
[Science](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/)
[Technology](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/)
[Gadgets](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/gadgets/)
[Internet](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/internet/)

  * [News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/ "News, International, National, Cities" )
    * [![A scene in Mayurimarg Hyderabad showing many vehicles partially submerged under flood waters. Photo: K.V.S. Giri](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Hyd_rains_3017628i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-throws-life-out-of-gear-in-hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Incessant rain throws life out of gear in
Hyderabad](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/incessant-rain-
throws-life-out-of-gear-in-
hyderabad/article9131262.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, Minister for Irrigation M.B. Patil
and Minister for Home G. Parameshwara heading for a meeting to discuss Carvery
issue at Vidhana Soudha . Photo: V. Sreenivasa
Murthy](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/CM_3017744i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-issue-bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BJP to boycott all-party meet convened by
Siddaramaiah](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-issue-
bjp-boycott-allparty-meet-convened-by-
siddaramaiah/article9130839.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![A securityman stops a vehicle during curfew in Srinagar on Tuesday. Photo:
Nissar
Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Kashmir_3017047i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national
/many-militants-killed-in-uri-as-army-foils-
infiltration/article9128296.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Jawan killed as Army foils infiltration bids in
Kashmir](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/many-militants-killed-in-uri-
as-army-foils-
infiltration/article9128296.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[International   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/) [National
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/) [Cities
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/)

  * [National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/ "National, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Other States" )
    * [![Youths line up outside the office of the Superintendent of Police, Pulwama, south Kashmir, to apply for the post of Special Police Officer on Tuesday. Photo: Nissar Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Valley_3017209i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/one-injured-64-arrested-in-valley/article9128893.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [One injured, 64 arrested in Valley
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/one-injured-64-arrested-
in-
valley/article9128893.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/China_3017210i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national
/china-caught-in-a-corridor-of-
uncertainty/article9129331.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [China caught in a corridor of
uncertainty](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/china-caught-in-a-corridor-
of-
uncertainty/article9129331.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Karnataka vehicles are not being allowed beyond Attibele check post. Photo:
K.C.
Deepika](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/Attibele_3016667i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka
/cauvery-row-sc-directs-karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Cauvery Row: SC directs Karnataka to release 6,000 cusecs a day to Tamil
Nadu](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/cauvery-row-sc-directs-
karnataka-to-release-6000-cusecs-a-day-to-tamil-
nadu/article9127735.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![The Cauvery river as seen in Mandya,
Karnataka.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/01230/07bg_Cauvery_Prote_1230082i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000
-cusecs-till-september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Supreme Court doubles quantum of Cauvery water for
TN](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/release-6000-cusecs-till-
september-27-sc-to-
karnataka/article9128290.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Andhra Pradesh   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/) [Kerala
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Telangana
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other States
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)

[Andhra Pradesh   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/andhra-pradesh/)
[Karnataka   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/) [Kerala
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/kerala/) [Tamil Nadu
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/) [Telangana
|](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/telangana/) [Other States
](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/)

  * [International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/ "International, South Asia, World" )
    * [![US President Barack Obama addresses the 71st session of United Nations General Assembly at the UN headquarters in New York on on Tuesday.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Obama_3017590i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/us-president-barack-obama-farewell-address-at-the-united-nations-general-assembly/article9130850.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Obama hits at populist strongmen in last UN
address](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/us-president-barack-obama-
farewell-address-at-the-united-nations-general-
assembly/article9130850.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif speaks during a high-level meeting at
the United Nations General Assembly in Manhattan in New
York.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/Sharif_3017588i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international
/pakistan-prime-minister-nawaz-sharif-on-kashmir-issue-at-the-united-nations-
general-
assembly/article9130836.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Sharif raising Kashmir with all leaders amid isolation
fears](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/pakistan-prime-minister-
nawaz-sharif-on-kashmir-issue-at-the-united-nations-general-
assembly/article9130836.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![PakistanPrime Minister Nawaz Sharif speaks during a high-level meeting on
addressing large movements of refugees and migrants at the United Nations
General Assembly in Manhattan in New
York.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/SHARIF_3016590i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international
/pakistan-prime-minister-nawaz-sharif-meets-us-secretary-of-state-john-kerry-
on-the-sidelines-of-71st-
unga/article9127284.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Kerry asks Pakistan not to allow safe haven for
terrorists](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/pakistan-prime-
minister-nawaz-sharif-meets-us-secretary-of-state-john-kerry-on-the-sidelines-
of-71st-
unga/article9127284.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![General Officer Commanding of Army’s 15 Corps Lt. General Subrata Saha
looks at items recovered from militants who were killed after their attack on
an Army camp at Uri, at the Army headquarters in Srinagar on Sunday. Photo:
Nissar Ahmad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/AMMINATION-
URI_223_3016570i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/uri-attack-
us-lawmakers-express-solidarity-with-
india/article9126939.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Uri attack: Bipartisan backing for India in
US](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/uri-attack-us-lawmakers-
express-solidarity-with-
india/article9126939.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[South Asia   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/south-asia/)
[World   ](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/world/)

[South Asia   |](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/south-asia/)
[World   ](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/world/)

  * [Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/ "Opinion, Cartoon, Columns, Editorial, Interview, Lead, Letters, Comment, Open Page, Readers' Editor" )
    * [![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/160921_-_Oped_-_wh_3017002i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/m-k-narayanan-on-indiapakistan-diplomacy-and-terrorism/article9128770.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [The best among limited options](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/m-k
-narayanan-on-indiapakistan-diplomacy-and-
terrorism/article9128770.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![unrecognised: “There is a clear distinction in the functioning of central
banks in advanced and emerging market economies.” The RBI headquarters in
Mumbai.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/21TH_RBI_2_3016990i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion
/op-ed/an-independent-rbi-is-a-chimera-writes-charan-
singh/article9128747.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [ An independent RBI is a chimera](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed
/an-independent-rbi-is-a-chimera-writes-charan-
singh/article9128747.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Responding to Uri](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/india-
respoding-to-uri-terrorist-
attack/article9124984.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

Gathering evidence regarding the four terrorists who stormed the army base in
U...

### [Copyright and copy-making](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial
/delhi-hc-verdict-on-university-photocopying-case-copyright-and-
copymaking/article9128736.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

The Delhi High Court verdict that photocopying portions of academic
publication...

[Cartoon   |](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/cartoon/) [Columns
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/columns/) [Editorial
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/) [Interview
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/interview/) [Lead
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/) [Letters
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/letters/) [Comment
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/) [Open Page
|](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/open-page/) [Readers' Editor
](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/Readers-Editor/)

  * [Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/ "Business, Agri-Business, Budget, Industry, Economy, Markets, Stock Quotes" )
    * [![Flipkart is the first e-commerce company in the country to hit the 100 million customers milestone. File Photo: G.R.N Somashekar](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/21in_Flipkart__2__3017615i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/flipkart-crosses-100-million-customers-milestone/article9131081.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Flipkart crosses 100 million customers milestone
](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/flipkart-crosses-100-million-
customers-
milestone/article9131081.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/TH21_GERMAN_AMBASS_3016969i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy
/high-import-duties-trade-pact-impasse-irk-
germany/article9128717.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [High import duties, trade pact impasse irk
Germany](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/high-import-duties-trade-
pact-impasse-irk-
germany/article9128717.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![TELECOM WARS: Bharti Airtel says deficiencies in Reliance Jio’s own network
are causing the call failures.—FILE
PHOTO](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03014/jio_3014963i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry
/reliance-jio-bharti-airtel-battle-
escalates/article9121187.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Reliance Jio, Bharti Airtel battle
escalates](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/reliance-jio-bharti-
airtel-battle-
escalates/article9121187.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![TAX CONUNDRUM: Ministry officials said the Centre still enjoys powers to
collect excise duty despite
notification.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/gst_3016028i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy
/gst-notification-triggers-uncertainty-over-excise-
duty/article9124982.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [GST notification triggers uncertainty over excise duty
](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/gst-notification-triggers-
uncertainty-over-excise-
duty/article9124982.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Agri-Business   |](http://www.thehindu.com/business/agri-business/) [Budget
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/) [Industry
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/) [Economy
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/) [Markets
|](http://www.thehindu.com/business/markets/) [Stock Quotes
](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/)

  * [Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/ "Sport, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Tennis, Races, Other Sports" )
    * [![Pakistan's Test captain Misbah-ul-Haq holds the mace handed over by ICC chief executive David Richardson during a ceremony at Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore on Wednesday. Misbah-ul-Haq says it's a big achievement to lead Pakistan to No. 1 in test rankings, given the team has not played on home soil for seven years.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/PAKISTAN_TEST_MACE_3017721i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/pakistan-awarded-icc-test-championship-mace/article9131533.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Pakistan awarded ICC Test Championship
mace](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/pakistan-awarded-icc-test-
championship-
mace/article9131533.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![M.S.K.
Prasad](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/MSK_PRASAD_3017732i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket
/bcci-appoints-former-wicketkeeper-msk-prasad-as-chairman-of-
selectors/article9131577.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [BCCI defies Lodha panel, MSK Prasad heads selection committee
](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/bcci-appoints-former-wicketkeeper-msk-
prasad-as-chairman-of-
selectors/article9131577.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![Kabaddi team captain Anup Kumar \(left\) speaks with former cricket captain
Kapil Dev during an event in Mumbai on Tuesday. The Kabaddi World Cup is
scheduled to be held from October 7 to 22 in
Gujarat.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03016/INDIA_KABADDI_3016832i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport
/other-sports/world-kabaddi-championships-2016-anup-kumar-to-lead-
india/article9128173.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Anup Kumar to lead India in Kabaddi World
Cup](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/world-kabaddi-
championships-2016-anup-kumar-to-lead-
india/article9128173.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[![BACK IN THE HUNT: Veteran administrator N. Srinivasan seems to have turned
the tide in his favour suddenly. FILE PHOTO: M.
Vedhan](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/03017/TH21SRINIVASAN__3017207i.jpg)](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket
/srinivasan-emerges-favourite-for-icc-
role/article9129332.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

### [Srinivasan emerges favourite for ICC
role](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/srinivasan-emerges-favourite-for-
icc-
role/article9129332.ece?ref=topnavwidget&utm_source=topnavdd&utm_medium=topnavdropdownwidget&utm_campaign=topnavdropdown)

[Cricket   |](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/) [Football
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/football/) [Hockey
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/hockey/) [Tennis
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/tennis/) [Races
|](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/races/) [Other Sports
](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/)

  * [Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/ "Videos, Entertainment, News, Sports" )
  * [Features](http://www.thehindu.com/features/ "Features, Cinema, Downtown, Education Plus, Friday Review, Property Plus, Metroplus, Magazine, Young World, Lit for Life, November Fest" )
  * [Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/ "Sci-Tech, Technology, Environment, Health, Science, Agriculture" )
  * [Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/crossword/ "Crossword" )

###

» Today's Paper » TAMIL NADU

MADURAI,  February 15, 2015

# ‘More foodgrain lost due to pests, diseases’

  * Special Correspondent

[print](?css=print "Print" )   ·   [T]( "Change Text Size" )  [T]( "Change
Text Size" )   [T+](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-
tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece?textsize=large&test=1 "Large Text Size" )  ·
[T-](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-
foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-diseases/article6898016.ece?textsize=small&test=2
"Small Text Size" )

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/PinExt.png)](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://www.thehindu.com
/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece&media=http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13
-feb-thsam-TN_MA_2311374g.jpg&description=‘More foodgrain lost due to pests,
diseases’)

[](http://addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=thehindu "Share via more
services" )

![Challenges now:Participants at a convention and symposium held at
Agricultural College and Research Institute in
Madurai.](http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13-feb-thsam-
TN_MA_2311374e.jpg)

Challenges now:Participants at a convention and symposium held at Agricultural
College and Research Institute in Madurai.

Though the country had become self-reliant in production of foodgrains and
cereals, 22 to 25 per cent of losses were caused by pests and diseases, said
P.K. Chakrabarty, Assistant Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, on Thursday.

Inaugurating a three-day annual convention and national symposium on
'Challenges and management approaches for crop diseases of national
importance,' organised to commemorate the golden jubilee celebrations of
Agricultural College and Research Institute here, Dr. Chakrabarty said
climatic change, change in cropping pattern, indiscriminate use of botanical
modules, mono cropping system, insufficient domestic quarantine and
introduction of newer pesticides in the market were the reasons for the
increased number of pathogens.

Efficient use of pesticides and introduction of uniform integrated pest and
disease management system for all crops, which would avoid confusion among
farmers, would play a key role in management of pests and diseases, he said.

K. Ramasamy, Vice-Chancellor, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, in his
presidential address, insisted on development of suitable pest control
mechanisms that would help farmers in protecting their crops.

Those who addressed the inaugural session included A.N. Sabalpara and Pokkar
Rawal of Indian Society of Mycology and Plant Pathology; R. Ravindran,
Registrar, M. Maheswaran, K. Ramaraju and N. Ragupathi, Directors, TNAU, and
C. Chinnusamy, Dean, Agricultural College and Research Institute.

More In: [TAMIL NADU](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-
tamilnadu/) | [NATIONAL](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[![](//assets.pinterest.com/images/PinExt.png)](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://www.thehindu.com
/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/more-foodgrain-lost-due-to-pests-
diseases/article6898016.ece&media=http://www.thehindu.com/multimedia/dynamic/02311/13
-feb-thsam-TN_MA_2311374g.jpg&description=‘More foodgrain lost due to pests,
diseases’)

[](http://addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=thehindu "Share via more
services" )

[Email the Editor](mailto:letters@thehindu.co.in "Email the Editor " )

![Today's
Paper](http://www.thehindu.com//todayThumb?templateURL=template/1-0-1)
[Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" )
[ePaper](http://epaper.thehindu.com/ "ePaper" ) [This Day That
Age](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-miscellaneous/ "This Day That
Age" ) [Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-miscellaneous/
"Crossword" ) [Archive](http://www.thehindu.com/archive/ "Archive" )

##### Group Sites

[The Hindu](http://www.thehindu.com/ "The Hindu" ) [தி
இந்து](http://tamil.thehindu.com/ "தி இந்து" ) [Business
Line](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/ "Business Line" ) [BL on
Campus](http://www.bloncampus.com/ "BL on Campus" )
[Sportstarlive](http://www.sportstarlive.com/ "Sportstarlive" )
[Frontline](http://www.frontline.in/ "Frontline" ) [The Hindu
Centre](http://www.thehinducentre.com/ "The Hindu Centre" )
[Images](http://www.thehinduimages.com/ "Images" )
[Classifieds](http://www.thehinduclassifieds.in/ "Classifieds" )
[RoofandFloor](http://www.roofandfloor.com/?utm_source=thehindu&utm_medium
=Side-widget&utm_campaign=Internal-Marketing "RoofandFloor" )

  

O  
P  
E  
N

close

#### Recent Article in TAMIL NADU

### [Education fair on Sunday](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-
national/tp-tamilnadu/education-fair-on-
sunday/article9129902.ece?ref=sliderNews)

IDP Education India, the leading student placement service provider will
organize UK, USA, Canada and New Zealand Education Fair on Sunday, ...
[»](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/education-
fair-on-sunday/article9129902.ece?ref=sliderNews)

  

**The Hindu:** [ Home](http://www.thehindu.com/ "Home" ) | [ Today's Paper](http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/ "Today's Paper" ) | [ News](http://www.thehindu.com/news/ "News" ) | [ National](http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/ "National" ) | [ International](http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/ "International" ) | [ Opinion](http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/ "Opinion" ) | [ Business](http://www.thehindu.com/business/ "Business" ) | [ Sport](http://www.thehindu.com/sport/ "Sport" ) | [ Videos](http://www.thehindu.com/videos/ "Videos" ) | [ Features](http://www.thehindu.com/features/ "Features" ) | [ Sci-Tech](http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/ "Sci-Tech" ) | [ Crossword](http://www.thehindu.com/crossword/ "Crossword" ) |   
**The Site:** | [About Us](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=aboutus "About Us" ) | [Terms of Use](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=termsofuse "Terms of Use" ) | [Privacy Policy](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=privacypolicy "Privacy Policy" ) | [Contacts](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=static&page=contact "Contacts" ) | [Archive](http://www.thehindu.com/archive/ "archive" ) | [Subscribe](http://www.thehindugroup.in/subscribe/ "Subscribe" ) | [RSS Feeds](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=rss "RSS Feeds" ) | [Site Map](http://www.thehindu.com/navigation/?type=sitemap "Site Map" )   
**Group Sites: ** [The Hindu](http://www.thehindu.com/ "The Hindu" ) | [தி இந்து](http://tamil.thehindu.com/ "தி இந்து" ) | [Business Line](http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/ "Business Line" ) | [BL on Campus](http://www.bloncampus.com/ "BL on Campus" ) | [Sportstarlive](http://www.sportstarlive.com/ "Sportstarlive" ) | [Frontline](http://www.frontline.in/ "Frontline" ) | [The Hindu Centre](http://www.thehinducentre.com/ "The Hindu Centre" ) | [RoofandFloor](https://roofandfloor.com/?utm_source=thehindu&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=Internal-Marketing "RoofandFloor" ) |   
[Publications](http://www.thehindu.com/publications/ "Publications" ) |
[eBooks](http://www.thehindu.com/ebooks/ "eBooks" ) |
[Images](http://www.thehinduimages.com/ "Images" ) |
[Classifieds](http://www.thehinduclassifieds.in/ "Classifieds" ) |

####  Comments to:
[web.thehindu@thehindu.co.in](mailto:web.thehindu@thehindu.co.in)
Copyright(C) 2016, The Hindu

![](http://www.thehindu.com/eae-
logger/Logger?rt=1&ctxId=749&pubId=4&cat=&objId=6898016&title=%e2%80%98More+foodgrain+lost+due+to+pests%2c+diseases%e2%80%99&url=archive%2c2015-02-15+00%3a00%3a00.0%2chttp%3a%2f%2fwww.thehindu.com
%2ftodays-paper%2ftp-national%2ftp-tamilnadu%2fmore-foodgrain-lost-due-to-
pests-diseases%2farticle6898016.ece&amp;type=article&amp;meta=ns)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/963357032/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

Agricultre
 
 
DEGREE STANDARD
 
 
 
1. IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE
 
 
Importance of Agriculture in Indian Economy and its sectoral
 
relationship 
-
 
Agricultural Development 
through five year plans in India and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Growth pattern of crops in India and Tamil Nadu in 
terms of area, production and productivity.
 
 
2. CROP PRODUCTION
 
 
Factors of Production 
-
 
Agricultural seasons of I
ndia and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Cropping patterns in India and 
Tamil Nadu 
-
 
package of practices of different crops 
-
 
Agro
-
Climatic zones of India and Tamil Nadu and 
their features 
-
 
Weather and Climate 
-
 
Weather forecasting. Soil 
-
 
Soil structure 
-
 
Factors influenc
ing 
soil structure 
-
 
Physical and Chemical properties 
-
 
Effect of nutrient availability and plant growth 
-
 
Problem soils and their management 
-
 
Soil survey 
-
 
its objectives and scope 
-
 
Soil fertility and 
productivity 
-
 
Organic manures, green manures, bio f
ertilizers 
-
 
Balanced usage 
-
 
integrated nutrient 
management 
-
 
Physiological disorders in crop plants and their management 
-
 
Dry farming 
-
 
Rainfed 
agriculture 
-
 
Conservation of soil and water 
-
 
Watershed and waste land development.
 
 
3. CROP IMPROVEMENT
 
 
Pr
inciples of breeding 
-
 
Breeding methods 
-
 
Modern tools in crop improvement 
-
 
Hybrid production 
-
 
Latest varieties of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Application of bio technology in Agriculture 
-
 
Tissue 
culture & its significance 
-
 
Transgenic Plants.
 
Seeds 
-
 
I
mportance of quality seeds in Agriculture 
-
 
Nucleus, Breeder, foundation, certified and 
labelled seeds 
-
 
Seed certification techniques and processes in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Seed testing 
-
 
Used 
village concept.
 
 
4. CROP PROTECTION
 
 
Importance of pest, disease and w
eed management in agriculture 
-
 
pest and disease surveillance and 
forecasting weather on pest and disease incidence 
-
 
Symptoms of damages and control measures of 
pest and diseases of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Integrated post and disease management in cro
p 
production 
-
 
Pesticide and their use 
-
 
Pattern 
-
 
plant production equipments and their use 
-
 
Plant 
quarantine.
 
Storage pests and disease and their management. Importance of biological control in insect 
management. Weeds 
-
 
Major weeds and their control.
 
 
5. CROP MANAGEMENT
 
 
Land use pattern and planning 
-
 
Size and distribution of holdings 
-
 
types and systems of farming 
-
 
Water resources development and management 
-
 
Irrigation management of different crops 
-
 
Command area development 
-
 
Ground water Developme
nt and Conjunctive use 
-
 
Water use efficiency 
-
 
Quality of irrigation water 
-
 
Its effect in soil and crops 
-
 
Management of poor quality water for crop 
growth.
 
Cropping system and integrated farming 
-
 
Recycling of agricultural waste 
-
 
Mushroom cultivation, 
bee 
keeping, silkwork rearing etc., Engery in Agricultural production 
-
 
Sources 
-
 
Solar, wind, animal, 
biomass and biogas 
-
 
Mechnisation in agriculture 
-
 
Tractors & tillers 
-
 
Agricultural implemets and 
Machineries and their usage.
 
Farm management 
-
 
Princip
les of farm business management 
-
 
Cost concepts 
-
 
Management of 
resources 
-
 
Farm Planning and budgeting 
-
 
Investment analysis 
-
 
Agricultural credit system in India 
-
 
Multi credit delivery system 
-
 
Role of nationalised banks and Regional Rural Banks 
-
 
Lead 
Bank 
Scheme 
-
 
Service area 
-
 
approach 
-
 
Scale of finance.
 
Agricultre
 
 
DEGREE STANDARD
 
 
 
1. IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE
 
 
Importance of Agriculture in Indian Economy and its sectoral
 
relationship 
-
 
Agricultural Development 
through five year plans in India and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Growth pattern of crops in India and Tamil Nadu in 
terms of area, production and productivity.
 
 
2. CROP PRODUCTION
 
 
Factors of Production 
-
 
Agricultural seasons of I
ndia and Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Cropping patterns in India and 
Tamil Nadu 
-
 
package of practices of different crops 
-
 
Agro
-
Climatic zones of India and Tamil Nadu and 
their features 
-
 
Weather and Climate 
-
 
Weather forecasting. Soil 
-
 
Soil structure 
-
 
Factors influenc
ing 
soil structure 
-
 
Physical and Chemical properties 
-
 
Effect of nutrient availability and plant growth 
-
 
Problem soils and their management 
-
 
Soil survey 
-
 
its objectives and scope 
-
 
Soil fertility and 
productivity 
-
 
Organic manures, green manures, bio f
ertilizers 
-
 
Balanced usage 
-
 
integrated nutrient 
management 
-
 
Physiological disorders in crop plants and their management 
-
 
Dry farming 
-
 
Rainfed 
agriculture 
-
 
Conservation of soil and water 
-
 
Watershed and waste land development.
 
 
3. CROP IMPROVEMENT
 
 
Pr
inciples of breeding 
-
 
Breeding methods 
-
 
Modern tools in crop improvement 
-
 
Hybrid production 
-
 
Latest varieties of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Application of bio technology in Agriculture 
-
 
Tissue 
culture & its significance 
-
 
Transgenic Plants.
 
Seeds 
-
 
I
mportance of quality seeds in Agriculture 
-
 
Nucleus, Breeder, foundation, certified and 
labelled seeds 
-
 
Seed certification techniques and processes in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Seed testing 
-
 
Used 
village concept.
 
 
4. CROP PROTECTION
 
 
Importance of pest, disease and w
eed management in agriculture 
-
 
pest and disease surveillance and 
forecasting weather on pest and disease incidence 
-
 
Symptoms of damages and control measures of 
pest and diseases of major crops in Tamil Nadu 
-
 
Integrated post and disease management in cro
p 
production 
-
 
Pesticide and their use 
-
 
Pattern 
-
 
plant production equipments and their use 
-
 
Plant 
quarantine.
 
Storage pests and disease and their management. Importance of biological control in insect 
management. Weeds 
-
 
Major weeds and their control.
 
 
5. CROP MANAGEMENT
 
 
Land use pattern and planning 
-
 
Size and distribution of holdings 
-
 
types and systems of farming 
-
 
Water resources development and management 
-
 
Irrigation management of different crops 
-
 
Command area development 
-
 
Ground water Developme
nt and Conjunctive use 
-
 
Water use efficiency 
-
 
Quality of irrigation water 
-
 
Its effect in soil and crops 
-
 
Management of poor quality water for crop 
growth.
 
Cropping system and integrated farming 
-
 
Recycling of agricultural waste 
-
 
Mushroom cultivation, 
bee 
keeping, silkwork rearing etc., Engery in Agricultural production 
-
 
Sources 
-
 
Solar, wind, animal, 
biomass and biogas 
-
 
Mechnisation in agriculture 
-
 
Tractors & tillers 
-
 
Agricultural implemets and 
Machineries and their usage.
 
Farm management 
-
 
Princip
les of farm business management 
-
 
Cost concepts 
-
 
Management of 
resources 
-
 
Farm Planning and budgeting 
-
 
Investment analysis 
-
 
Agricultural credit system in India 
-
 
Multi credit delivery system 
-
 
Role of nationalised banks and Regional Rural Banks 
-
 
Lead 
Bank 
Scheme 
-
 
Service area 
-
 
approach 
-
 
Scale of finance.
 
Agricultre
 
 
Marketing 
-
 
Agricultural marketing and price policy of Agricultural commodities 
-
 
Market structure 
-
 
Warehouses & rural godowns 
-
 
Post harvest technologies 
-
 
Agri business management 
-
 
Marketing 
Ins
titutions.
 
Policies for agricultural development 
-
 
Economic liberalisation 
-
 
WTO and its impact on agricultural 
export. Extension methods for transfer of technology 
-
 
Agriocultural Information technology 
-
 
Role of 
women in Agriculture.
 
 
![](/pix/lawslogo.png)

[![](/pix/prslogo3.png)](http://www.prsindia.org/)

  * [Home](http://www.lawsofindia.org/index.php)
  * [About](http://www.lawsofindia.org/aboutus.php)
  * [State](http://www.lawsofindia.org/thestates.php)
  * [Advanced Search](http://www.lawsofindia.org/advanced.php)
  * [Contact us](http://www.lawsofindia.org/contactus.php)

[ Sign In
](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
| [Register ](/regform.php)

**Username**  
  
---  
**Password**  
  
  
Remember Me  
  
[Forgot Password](/forgot.php)  
  

[ _**Register**_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/regform.php) (Downloading laws
require registration)

## Search Laws

  

## State Lists

  * **[Andhra Pradesh** _(204 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/18/Andhra Pradesh.html)
  * **[Arunachal Pradesh** _(48 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/14/Arunachal Pradesh.html)
  * **[Assam** _(138 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/29/Assam.html)
  * **[Bihar** _(54 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/34/Bihar.html)
  * **[Chhattisgarh** _(58 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/22/Chhattisgarh.html)
  * **[Delhi** _(63 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/21/Delhi.html)
  * **[Goa** _(163 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/35/Goa.html)
  * **[Gujarat** _(294 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/13/Gujarat.html)
  * **[Haryana** _(326 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/15/Haryana.html)
  * **[Himachal Pradesh** _(237 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/23/Himachal Pradesh.html)
  * **[Jammu And Kashmir** _(263 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/32/Jammu And Kashmir.html)
  * **[Jharkhand** _(35 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/28/Jharkhand.html)
  * **[Karnataka** _(294 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/19/Karnataka.html)
  * **[Kerala** _(317 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/11/Kerala.html)
  * **[Madhya Pradesh** _(111 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/33/Madhya Pradesh.html)
  * **[Maharashtra** _(516 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/38/Maharashtra.html)
  * **[Manipur** _(18 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/30/Manipur.html)
  * **[Meghalaya** _(121 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/36/Meghalaya.html)
  * **[Mizoram** _(34 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/31/Mizoram.html)
  * **[Nagaland** _(78 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/17/Nagaland.html)
  * **[Orissa** _(210 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/20/Orissa.html)
  * **[Puducherry** _(68 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/24/Puducherry.html)
  * **[Punjab** _(236 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/25/Punjab.html)
  * **[Rajasthan** _(32 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/37/Rajasthan.html)
  * **[Sikkim** _(86 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/12/Sikkim.html)
  * **[Tamil Nadu** _(614 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/26/Tamil Nadu.html)
  * **[Tripura** _(60 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/9/Tripura.html)
  * **[Uttar Pradesh** _(335 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/7/Uttar Pradesh.html)
  * **[Uttarakhand** _(67 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/16/Uttarakhand.html)
  * **[West Bengal** _(376 laws)_](http://www.lawsofindia.org/state/27/West Bengal.html)
  *  

** The Tamil Nadu Agricultural Pests and Diseases Act, 1919**

  

Act No : 3 of 1919

Keywords : Insect Pest, Plant Disease, Noxious Weed, Plant, Occupier, Director
of Agriculture

  
  
  

Amendment appended: 28 of 1982

  

[![Bookmark and Share](http://s7.addthis.com/static/btn/v2/lg-share-
en.gif)](http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&pub=prsindia)

[ ** Download Pdf (2437 KB)
**](/downloadfile.php?lawid=5212&file=tamil_nadu/1919/1919TN3.pdf&pageurl=%2Fstatelaw%2F5212%2FTheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
|  [**Add
Keywords**](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)
|  **[Report
Error](/loginform.php?ref=http://www.lawsofindia.org/statelaw/5212/TheTamilNaduAgriculturalPestsandDiseasesAct1919.html)**
|  **Disclaimer**

DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by
PRS Legislative Research (PRS). The contents of this document have been
obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These contents have not
been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to
the accuracy, completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act
and/or some Amendment Act may not be available. Principal Acts may or may not
include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the
relevant state department concerned or refer to the latest government
publication or the gazette notification. Any person using this material should
take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information
contained in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept
any liability arising from the use of this document. PRS or any persons
connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the
basis of this document.

**Choose another year for the list of laws from Tamil Nadu**

The list of years in which laws have been enacted may not be complete.

1837183918491851185818591862186418651866  
  
1867186918731876187818791882188418851886  
  
1888188918901891189218931894189618981899  
  
1900190219041905190819111914191819191920  
  
1922192319241925192619271928192919301931  
  
1933193419351936193719381939194019411942  
  
1943194519471948194919501951195219531954  
  
1955195619571958195919601961196219631964  
  
1965196619671968196919701971197219731974  
  
1975197619771978197919801981198219831985  
  
1986198719881989199119921993199419951996  
  
1997199819992000200120022003200520062007  
  
2008200920102011201220132014

![](//in-
gmtdmp.mookie1.com/t/v2/learn?tagid=V2_2454&src.rand=\[timestamp\]&src.id=BusinessStd)

  * [Home](/)
  * [Markets](/markets)
  * [Companies](/companies)
  * [Opinion](/opinion)
  * [Politics](/politics)
  * [Technology](/technology)
  * [Specials](/specials)
  * [PF](/pf)
  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

  * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
  * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
  * [Economy](/economy-policy)
  * [Finance](/finance)
  * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
  * [International](/international)
  * [Management](/management)
  * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
  * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
  * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
  * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [News](/markets-news)
  * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
  * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
  * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
  * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
  * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
  * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
  * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [News](/companies-news)
  * [Results](/companies-results)
  * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
  * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
  * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
  * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
  * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
  * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
  * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
  * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
  * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Punditry](/punditry)
  * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
  * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
  * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
  * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
  * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
  * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
  * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
  * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
  * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
  * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
  * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
  * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [News](/technology-news)
  * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
  * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
  * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
  * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
  * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
  * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
  * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
  * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
  * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
  * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
  * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
  * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
  * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [News](/pf-news)
  * [Features](/pf-features)
  * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
  * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
  * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
  * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
  * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
  * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)
  * [Markets](/markets)
    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)
  * [Companies](/companies)
    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)
  * [Opinion](/opinion)
    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)
  * [Politics](/politics)
    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)
  * [Technology](/technology)
    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)
  * [Specials](/specials)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)
  * [PF](/pf)
    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)
  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)
    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)

    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [Markets](/markets)

    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [Companies](/companies)

    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Opinion](/opinion)

    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [Politics](/politics)

    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [Technology](/technology)

    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Specials](/specials)

    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [PF](/pf)

    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)

  * [My Page](/user/my-page)

  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * [Home](/)

    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper/)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Economy](/economy-policy)
    * [Finance](/finance)
    * [Current Affairs](/current-affairs)
    * [International](/international)
    * [Management](/management)
    * [The Strategist](/category/specials-strategist-10903.htm)
    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm)
    * [Data Stories](/category/specials-data-stories-10908.htm)
    * [Chat](/chat/home)

  * [Markets](/markets)

    * [News](/markets-news)
    * [Stocks](/markets-stocks)
    * [Commodities](/markets-commodities)
    * [IPOs](/markets-ipos)
    * [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)
    * [Mutual Fund Tools](/live-market/mutual-fund/mf-tools)
    * [Derivatives](/derivatives/dashboard/)
    * [BS Fund Manager](/category/markets-bs-fund-manager-2013-1062001.htm)

  * [Companies](/companies)

    * [News](/companies-news)
    * [Results](/companies-results)
    * [Auto](/sector/display-article/Auto)
    * [Engineering](/sector/display-article/Engineering)
    * [Financials](/sector/display-article/Financials)
    * [Infra](/sector/display-article/Infrastructure)
    * [IT](/sector/display-article/IT)
    * [Oil & Gas](/sector/display-article/Oil%20%26%20Gas)
    * [Telecom](/sector/display-article/Telecom)
    * [Services](/sector/display-article/Services)
    * [All Sectors](/category/companies-all-sectors-10117.htm)

  * [Opinion](/opinion)

    * [Punditry](/punditry)
    * [Editorial Comment](/opinion-editorial)
    * [Columnists](/opinion-columns)
    * [Have Your Say](/discussion-forum/)
    * [Financial X-Ray](/opinion-financial-x-ray)
    * [Business Law & Tax](/opinion-business-law-taxation)
    * [Breakingviews](/opinion-breakingviews)
    * [Lunch](/category/opinion-lunch-10507.htm)
    * [Poll](/poll/list)

  * [Politics](/politics)

    * [North](/category/politics-news-north-1550102.htm)
    * [East](/category/politics-news-east-1550104.htm)
    * [West](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm)
    * [South](/category/politics-news-south-1550103.htm#414)
    * [Election](/elections#415)

  * [Technology](/technology)

    * [News](/technology-news)
    * [Mobiles & Tablets](/category/technology-news-mobiles-tablets-1080101.htm)
    * [Apps](/category/technology-news-apps-1080102.htm)
    * [People](/category/technology-news-people-1080107.htm)
    * [Computers](/category/technology-news-computers-1080103.htm)

  * [Specials](/specials)

    * [Weekend](/category/specials-weekend-10904.htm#188)
    * [Digital Consumer](/category/specials-digital-c-1090701.htm)
    * [PE/VC](/category/specials-pe-vc-10976.htm)
    * [Brand World](/category/specials-brand-w-10906.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
    * [Start-ups](/category/companies-start-ups-10113.htm)
    * [Defence](/category/specials-defence-10974.htm)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [Sponsored Content](/category/sponsored-content-158.htm)

  * [PF](/pf)

    * [News](/pf-news)
    * [Features](/pf-features)
    * [Investments](/pf-news-investments)
    * [Loans & Credit Cards](/pf-news-loans)
    * [Tax](/pf-news-tax)
    * [Insurance](/pf-news-insurance)
    * [Financial Tools](/personal-finance/financial-tools/)

  * [Portfolio](/portfolio)
  * [My Page](/user/my-page)
  * [Gallery](/photo-gallery/list)

    * [Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/list#418)
    * [Video Gallery](/video-gallery/list/)

  * BS APPS 
    * [iPad](/ipad "Download BS IPAD App" )
    * [iPhone](/iphone "Download BS IPHONE App" )
    * [Android](/android "Download BS ANDROID App" )
    * [Wap](/wap "Business Standard on Mobile" )
  * BS PRODUCTS 
    * [Smart Investor](http://smartinvestor.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Hindi](http://hindi.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Motoring](http://www.bsmotoring.com/)
    * [BS Books](http://books.business-standard.com/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper)
    * [Economy &amp; Industry](http://books.business-standard.com/magazine.php#eco)
  * BS SPECIALS 
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [Power & Energy](/category/specials-power-10927.htm)
    * [SME](/category/sme-111.htm)
  * [BS E-Paper](http://epaper.business-standard.com)

  * Hi, 
    * [Change Password](/user/change-password)
    * [Subscribe](/subscription-cart)
    * [ Sign out](/user/sign-out)
    * [Change Password](/user/change-password)
    * [Manage My Account](/subscription-cart/manage)
    * [](/subscription-cart/product)
    * [ Sign out](/user/sign-out)
  * [SIGN IN](javascript:void\(0\);)
  * [Subscribe](/subscription-cart)

  * [ ](http://www.facebook.com/bsindia "Find Us on Facebook" )
  * [ ](https://plus.google.com/105513640026823338822 "Follow on Google Plus" )
  * [ ](https://in.linkedin.com/company/business-standard "Connect on Linkedin" )
  * [ ](http://twitter.com/bsindia "Follow Us on Twitter" )
  * [ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/BusinessStandardLtd "Subscribe Us on Youtube" )
  * [ ](/rss-feeds/listing/ "RSS Feed" )

[![Business Standard](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/business-standard-logo.png)](/)

TRENDING ON BS

  * [ #CauveryDispute](http://www.business-standard.com/search?q=cauvery&company-code=)

  *   * News Stock Quote Authors
  * [](javascript:void\(0\);)

 News |    Stock Quote |    Authors  
---|---|---  
  
[PTI Stories](/category/pti-stories-139.htm) » [National](/category/pti-
stories-national-13902.htm) » [News](/category/pti-stories-national-
news-1390201.htm)

# Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and [Tamil Nadu
](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural University (TNAU) has come out
with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt.

![image]()

Press Trust of India

Business Standard

http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/_media/bs/wap/images/bs_logo_amp.png 177
22

[![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-09/thumb/Todays_paper_super_728x90_fis-1473150529.png)](http://www.fisglobal.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/advertisement/images/kotak_728x90.jpg)](http://www.kotak.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-09/thumb/Todays_paper_super_728x90_capgemini-1473150530.jpg)](https://www.capgemini.com/)

[Business Standard](https://plus.google.com/105513640026823338822?rel=author)

# Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

Press Trust of India  |  Coimbatore  April 20, 2015 Last Updated at 13:22 IST

[ ![Tiny URL](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon/link-icon.png)
](javascript:void\(0\);) [ ![Add to My Page](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/addto_mypage.jpg) ](/user/my-page
/add-article/item-id/115042000310) [ ![Print](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/print.jpg) ](http://www.business-
standard.com/article/printer-friendly-version?article_id=115042000310_1) [
![Email](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/email.jpg) ](javascript:void\(0\);
"Email this page" )

[![](/include/_mod/site/images/close_img.png)](javascript:showhideEmailBox\('article','n'\);)

## email this article

Message: |  | Recipients' Email: |  Type address separated by commas  
---|---|---|---  
Your Email:|  |  | ![](/include/_mod/site/images/refresh_btn.png)Enter the
characters shown in the image.  
Send me a copy:  |  
  |  |  
  
http://mybs.in/2RufpBo

  

Copy tiny URL to save and share articles.

  * ## ALSO READ

[Tamil Nadu Newsprint &amp; Papers standalone net profit rises 2.09% in the
December 2014 quarter](/article/news-cm/tamil-nadu-newsprint-papers-
standalone-net-profit-rises-2-09-in-the-december-2014-quarter-
115021300188_1.html) [Tamil Nadu Newsprint &amp; Papers standalone net profit
declines 23.82% in the September 2014 quarter](/article/news-cm/tamil-nadu-
newsprint-papers-standalone-net-profit-declines-23-82-in-the-september-2014
-quarter-114111300302_1.html) [CCI dismisses case against Tamil Nadu's tax
authorities](/article/pti-stories/cci-dismisses-case-against-tamil-nadu-s-tax-
authorities-114103100764_1.html) [Tata Docomo looking to double turnover from
rural Tamil Nadu](/article/pti-stories/tata-docomo-looking-to-double-turnover-
from-rural-tamil-nadu-115041001093_1.html) [Professional mourner from Tamil
Nadu exhibits grief show](/article/pti-stories/professional-mourner-from-
tamil-nadu-exhibits-grief-show-115020500638_1.html)

  * 

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and [Tamil Nadu
](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural University (TNAU) has come out
with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.

  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt.

  * Read More On
  * ## [National News](/search?type=news&q=National+News)

|

## [Tamil Nadu](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)

|

## [Pti Stories](/category/pti-stories-139.htm)

|

## [News](/category/pti-stories-national-news-1390201.htm)

PREVIOUS STORY

NEXT STORY

![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon
/prev-icon.jpg) ![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/icon/next-icon.jpg)

##

##### RECOMMENDED FOR YOU

  

Advertisements

  * [Should You Rely Only on Your Corporate Health Insurance?](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1361)
  * [MIT Sloan Executive Program in General Management](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1359)
  * [New to the stock market? Take your FirstStep](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1355)
  * [Super Saver Health Insurance for Whole Family](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1352)
  * [Buy New Age Health Insurance with Added Benefits](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1351)
  * [Serve the next wave-bring mobile broad band to everyone](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1362)
  * [Open Free Demat A/c with low brokerage fee](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1356)
  * [MIT Sloan EPGM: Get Alumni benefits, Apply Now](/click-tracker/textlink/id/1360)

## Possibility of outbreak of pests and diseases in rice crop

###

Due to abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of
Tamil Nadu, there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and
diseases in rice crop and Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) has come
out with a special forecast for the benefit of farmers This was to create
awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the insect pests and
diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant Protection Studies,
TNAU, said. Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of
which appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker
borders. Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said. To ... Due to
abnormal weather coupled with depression in different districts of Tamil Nadu,
there is the possibility for the outbreak of various pests and diseases in
rice crop and [Tamil Nadu ](/search?type=news&q=Tamil+Nadu)Agricultural
University (TNAU) has come out with a special forecast for the benefit of
farmers  
  
This was to create awareness among the farmers, who can monitor and manage the
insect pests and diseases on the crop, Directorate of Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, TNAU, said.  
  
Farmers can monitor the rice crops for these diseases, symptoms of which
appear as spindle-shaped lesions with white to gray-green darker borders.  
  
Older lesions are whitish to grey with necrotic borders, it said.  
  
Farmers are advised to do delayed application of nitrogenous fertilizer and
spray immediately after observing initial infection of the blast disease with
carbendazim 50WP @500 g/ha or tricyclazole 75WP @ 500g/ha or metominostrobin
20 SC @ 500ml/ha or azoxystrobin 25 SC @ 500ml/ha, it said.  
  
To control brown spot disease, they can spray mancozeb (2.0g/lit) 2 to 3 times
at 10-15 day intervals, based on the intensity of disease.  
  
Farmers should be insisted that before spraying chemicals for the management
of brown plant hopper, water should be drained from the field.  
  
Already the incidence of leaf folder was recorded around 1,000 ha in the rice
fields of Tirupur district The larvae feed on the leaves of rice by rolling
eaves and leaving scrapping symptoms which will appear white in colour from
distance.  
  
The affected leaves will dry and in severe cases plants will wilt. ![image]()

Press Trust of India

Business Standard

http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/_media/bs/wap/images/bs_logo_amp.png 177
22

[![](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-06/thumb/Todays_paper_footer_728x90_fis-1465558769.png)](http://www.fisglobal.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/advertisement/images/kotak_728x90.jpg)](http://www.kotak.com/)[![](http://bsmedia
.business-
standard.com/_media/bs/img/banner/2016-06/thumb/Todays_paper_footer_728x90_capgemini-1465558769.jpg)](https://www.capgemini.com/)

## MORE ON MARKETS:

##### Quick Links

  * ###### [Stock Market Live](/markets-stocks)

  * ###### [Portfolio ](/portfolio)

  * ###### [Commodity Market](/markets-commodities)

  * ###### [Upcoming IPO](/markets-ipos)

  * ###### [Personal Finance](/pf)

  * ###### [Stock Market News](/markets-news)

  * ###### [Derivatives](/markets-derivatives)

  * ###### [Mutual Funds](/markets-mutual-funds)

  * ###### [Gold Price](/live-market/commodity/search/symbol/GOLD/exchng/mcx)

  * ###### [Sensex](/stocks/market-statistics/bse/index-components?indices=1001)

##### Browse STOCK Companies

  * [A](/stocks/stock-quote-list/a)
  * [B](/stocks/stock-quote-list/b)
  * [C](/stocks/stock-quote-list/c)
  * [D](/stocks/stock-quote-list/d)
  * [E](/stocks/stock-quote-list/e)
  * [F](/stocks/stock-quote-list/f)
  * [G](/stocks/stock-quote-list/g)
  * [H](/stocks/stock-quote-list/h)
  * [I](/stocks/stock-quote-list/i)
  * [J](/stocks/stock-quote-list/j)
  * [K](/stocks/stock-quote-list/k)
  * [L](/stocks/stock-quote-list/l)
  * [M](/stocks/stock-quote-list/m)
  * [N](/stocks/stock-quote-list/n)
  * [O](/stocks/stock-quote-list/o)
  * [P](/stocks/stock-quote-list/p)
  * [Q](/stocks/stock-quote-list/q)
  * [R](/stocks/stock-quote-list/r)
  * [S](/stocks/stock-quote-list/s)
  * [T](/stocks/stock-quote-list/t)
  * [U](/stocks/stock-quote-list/u)
  * [V](/stocks/stock-quote-list/v)
  * [W](/stocks/stock-quote-list/w)
  * [X](/stocks/stock-quote-list/x)
  * [Y](/stocks/stock-quote-list/y)
  * [Z](/stocks/stock-quote-list/z)

  * [1](/stocks/stock-quote-list/1)
  * [2](/stocks/stock-quote-list/2)
  * [3](/stocks/stock-quote-list/3)
  * [4](/stocks/stock-quote-list/4)
  * [5](/stocks/stock-quote-list/5)
  * [6](/stocks/stock-quote-list/6)
  * [7](/stocks/stock-quote-list/7)
  * [8](/stocks/stock-quote-list/8)
  * [9](/stocks/stock-quote-list/9)

##### Browse Mutual Funds

  * [A](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/a)
  * [B](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/b)
  * [C](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/c)
  * [D](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/d)
  * [E](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/e)
  * [F](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/f)
  * [G](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/g)
  * [H](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/h)
  * [I](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/i)
  * [J](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/j)
  * [K](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/k)
  * [L](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/l)
  * [M](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/m)
  * [N](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/n)
  * [O](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/o)
  * [P](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/p)
  * [Q](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/q)
  * [R](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/r)
  * [S](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/s)
  * [T](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/t)
  * [U](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/u)
  * [V](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/v)
  * [W](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/w)
  * [X](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/x)
  * [Y](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/y)
  * [Z](/live-market/mutual-fund/mutual-fund-list/z)

##### Index Stocks

  * [ ACC ](/company/acc-6.html)
  * [ Adani Ports ](/company/adany-ports-21281.html)
  * [ Ambuja Cem. ](/company/ambuja-chem-218.html)
  * [ Asian Paints ](/company/asian-paints-34.html)
  * [ Aurobindo Pharma ](/company/aurobindo-pharma-4666.html)
  * [ Axis Bank ](/company/axis-bank-5554.html)
  * [ B H E L ](/company/b-h-e-l-2306.html)
  * [ B P C L ](/company/b-p-c-l-2290.html)
  * [ Bajaj Auto ](/company/bajaj-auto-28074.html)
  * [ Bank of Baroda ](/company/bank-of-baroda-5456.html)
  * [ Bharti Airtel ](/company/bharti-airtel-15542.html)
  * [ Bharti Infra. ](/company/bharti-infra-40279.html)
  * [ Bosch ](/company/bosch-378.html)
  * [ Cipla ](/company/cairn-india-114.html)
  * [ Coal India ](/company/coal-india-12019.html)
  * [ Dr Reddy's Labs ](/company/dr-reddy-s-labs-815.html)
  * [ Eicher Motors ](/company/eicher-motors-151.html)
  * [ GAIL (India) ](/company/gail-india-12350.html)
  * [ Grasim Inds ](/company/grasim-inds-227.html)
  * [ H D F C ](/company/h-d-f-c-230.html)
  * [ HCL Technologies ](/company/hcl-technologies-5656.html)
  * [ HDFC Bank ](/company/hdfc-bank-4987.html)
  * [ Hero Motocorp ](/company/hero-motocorp-237.html)
  * [ Hind. Unilever ](/company/hind-unilever-255.html)
  * [ Hindalco Inds. ](/company/hindalco-inds-252.html)
  * [ ICICI Bank ](/company/icici-bank-5418.html)
  * [ Idea Cellular ](/company/idea-cellular-23040.html)
  * [ IndusInd Bank ](/company/indusInd-bank-5531.html)
  * [ Infosys ](/company/infosys-2806.html)
  * [ ITC ](/company/itc-301.html)
  * [ Kotak Mah. Bank ](/company/kotak-mah-bank-2330.html)
  * [ Larsen &amp; Toubro ](/company/larsen-toubro-348.html)
  * [ Lupin ](/company/lupin-3026.html)
  * [ M &amp; M ](/company/m-m-365.html)
  * [ Maruri Suzuki ](/company/maruti-suzuki-5496.html)
  * [ NTPC ](/company/ntpc-12001.html)
  * [ O N G C ](/company/o-n-g-c-6068.html)
  * [ Power Grid Corpn ](/company/power-grid-corpn-5455.html)
  * [ Reliance Inds. ](/company/reliance-inds-476.html)
  * [ St Bk of India ](/company/st-bk-of-india-5654.html)
  * [ Sun Pharma. Inds. ](/company/sun-pharma-inds-4325.html)
  * [ Tata Motors ](/company/tata-motors-560.html)
  * [ Tata Motors-DVR ](/company/tata-motors-dvr-36014.html)
  * [ Tata Power Co. ](/company/tata-power-co-554.html)
  * [ Tata Steel ](/company/tata-steel-566.html)
  * [ TCS ](/company/tcs-5400.html)
  * [ Tech Mahindra ](/company/tech-mahindra-17215.html)
  * [ UltraTech Cement Ltd ](/company/ultratech-cem-24951.html)
  * [ Wipro ](/company/wipro-614.html)
  * [ Yes Bank ](/company/yes-bank-25267.html)
  * [ Zee Entertainment ](/company/zee-entertainmen-3126.html)

![Business Standard](http://bsmedia.business-
standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/bs-footer-logo.jpg)

Copyrights © 2015 Business Standard Private Ltd. All rights reserved.

  *     * #### From BS Website

    * [Home](/home-page)
    * [Companies](/companies)
    * [Markets](/markets)
    * [Opinion](/opinion)
    * [Politics](/politics)
    * [Technology](/technology)
    * [Specials](/specials)
    * [Personal Finance](/pf)
    * [Budget](/budget2016)
    * [Latest News](/latest-news/)
    * [Today's Paper](/todays-paper)
    * [RBI Policy](/category/specials-rbi-policy-10931.htm)
    * [General News](/general-news)
    * [General Videos](/general-video/list)
    * [General Photo Gallery](/photo-gallery/general-list)
    * [Events](/category/sponsored-content-events-15802.htm)
    * [Authors](/author)
  *     * #### About us

    * [About Us](/about-us)
    * [Code of Conduct](/code-of-conduct)
    * [Terms &amp; Conditions](/terms-conditions)
    * [Disclaimer](/disclaimer)
    * [Investor Communication](/investor-communication.html)

    * #### Support &amp; Contact

    * [Partner with Us](/partner-with-us)
    * [Careers](/careers)
    * [Advertise with Us](/advertise-with-us)
    * [Contact Us](/contact-us)
    * [Feedback](/feedback)
    * [Browser Support](/browser-support)
    * [Sitemap](/sitemap.html)
  *     * #### Subscribe

    * [E-Paper](http://epaper.business-standard.com/bsepaper/login.php)
    * [BS Magazines](http://books.business-standard.com/magazine.php)
    * [Portfolio Tracker](/portfolio)

    * #### BS Products

    * [Smart Investor](http://smartinvestor.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Hindi](http://hindi.business-standard.com/)
    * [BS Motoring](http://www.bsmotoring.com/index2.php)
    * [BS Books](http://books.business-standard.com/)
    * [B2B Connect](/b2b-connect)
    * [iPhone](/iphone)
    * [iPad](/ipad)
    * [android](/android)
    * [wap](/wap)
    * [BS Fund Cafe 2016](/category/events-business-standard-fund-cafe-2016-1750301.htm)

  * #### Elections 2016

  * [Assam Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-assam-assembly-2016-11711.htm)
  * [Kerala Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-kerala-assembly-2016-11714.htm)
  * [Tamil Nadu Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-tamil-nadu-assembly-2016-11712.htm)
  * [West Bengal Elections](http://www.business-standard.com/category/elections-west-bengal-assembly-2016-11713.htm)

#### Connect with BS

  * [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/bsindia "Find Us on Facebook" )
  * [Google+](https://plus.google.com/+businessstandard/posts "Follow on Google Plus" )
  * [Linkedin](https://in.linkedin.com/company/business-standard "Connect on Linkedin" )
  * [Twitter](https://twitter.com/bsindia "Follow Us on Twitter" )
  * [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/user/BusinessStandardLtd "Subscribe Us on Youtube" )
  * [RSS](/rss-feeds/listing/ "RSS Feed" )

![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images
/business-standard-logo.png)

**Upgrade To Premium Services**  
  
---  
  
Welcome User

Business Standard is happy to inform you of the launch of "Business Standard
Premium Services"

As a premium subscriber you get an across device unfettered access to a range
of services which include:

  * Access Exclusive content - articles, features & opinion pieces
  * Weekly Industry/Genre specific newsletters - Choose multiple industries/genres
  * Access to 17 plus years of content archives
  * Set Stock price alerts for your portfolio and watch list and get them delivered to your e-mail box
  * End of day news alerts on 5 companies (via email)
  * **NEW**: Get seamless access to WSJ.com at a great price. No additional sign-up required.

  
---  
  
![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images
/business-standard-logo.png)

**Premium Services **

**In Partnership with ![](http://bsmedia.business-standard.com/include/_mod/site/html5/images/fis logo 130x58.png)**  
  
---  
  
  
  
**Dear Guest,**  
  
  
  
Welcome to the premium services of Business Standard brought to you courtesy
FIS.  
Kindly visit the [Manage my subscription page](/subscription-cart/manage) to
discover the benefits of this programme.  
  
Enjoy Reading!  
Team Business Standard

  
---  
  
![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=8021726&cv=2.0&cj=1)

EvaluationofIntegratedPestandDiseaseManagementModuleforShallotsinTamilNadu,
India:aFarmer™sParticipatoryApproach
D.Dinakaran,
1G.Gajendran,
1S.Mohankumar,
2G.Karthikeyan,
3S.Thiruvudainambi,
1E.I.Jonathan,
3R.Samiyappan,
2D.G.Pfeiffer,
4E.G.Rajotte,
5G.W.Norton,
6S.Miller,
7andR.Muniappan
81AnbilDharmalingamAgriculturalCollegeandResearchInstitute,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,DindigulRd.,NavalurKuttapattu,Tiruchirappalli-620009,
India.2CentreforPlantMolecularBiologyandBiotechnology,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
3CentreforPlantProtectionStudies,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
4Correspondingauthor:DepartmentofEntomology,117DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061(e-mail:dgpfeiff@vt.edu).
5DepartmentofEntomology,501ASI,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity,UniversityPark,PA16802.
6DepartmentofAgriculturalandAppliedEconomics,250DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
7DepartmentofPlantPathology,1680MadisonAve.,TheOhioStateUniversity–OARDC,Wooster,OH44691.
8IPM–CRSP,OfficeinInternationalResearch,EducationandDevelopment,526Prices’sForkRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
J.Integ.PestMngmt.4(2):2013;DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/IPM12019
ABSTRACT.EffortsmadetoevaluatetheIntegratedPestManagement(IPM)moduleforshallotsthroughFarmer’sParticipatory
ApproachinTamilNadu,India,arediscussed.TheshallotIPMmodulewithspecialemphasisonnonchemicalmanagement
componentsviz.,healthyseedbulbselection,seedtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,soilapplicationofbio-pesticidesandbio-inputs,

growingofbarriercrops,installationofstickytrapsandpheromonetraps,sprayapplicationofbio-pesticides,andneed-based

applicationofsyntheticpesticideswereevaluatedinlargefieldsinfarmers’holdingsinsixlocationsduring2009–2012.Inallthe

locations,theIPMfieldsregisteredreducedincidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(5.99
thrips/plant),leafminer(
Liriomyzasp.)(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(3.51%damage),basalrot
(Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.Hansen)(3.50%incidence)andpurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)
(24.50PercentDiseaseIndex)comparedwithfarmer’sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceofonionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),

leafminer(19.65%damage),tobaccocutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch(51.6Percent

DiseaseIndex).TheIPMfieldsregisteredahighermeanbulbyieldof13.81t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:3.05comparedwith

10.69t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:2.47infarmer’sapproach.Fielddays,exhibitions,anddemonstrationswereorganizedin

allthelocationstopopularizetheshallotIPMmoduleamongthegrowers.
KeyWords:
shallot,shallotpests,shallotdiseases,onion,onionpests
Onion,Alliumcepa
L.(Alliaceae)isoneofthemostimportant
commercialvegetablecropsinIndia,cultivatedinanareaof
756,000ha.Twomaintypesofonions,bulbonion(
Alliumcepa
varietycepa)andshallotormultiplieronion(
Alliumcepa
varietyaggregatum),arecultivatedinIndiawiththeproductionandpro-

ductivityof12.16milliontonnesand16.10tonnes/ha,respectively

(www.nhb.gov.in).InthestateofTamilNadu,thesouthernmost

partofIndia,onioniscultivatedinanareaof30,255hawitha

productionof286,000tonnes.Theshallotisthemostcommontype

ofonioncultivatedinTamilNaduanditiscommonlypropagated

throughbulbs.TheaverageproductivityofonioninTamilNaduis

9.45tonnes/ha(www.tn.gov.in).Insectpests,especiallyonion

thrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(Fig.1),leafminer(
Liriomyza
sp.)(Fig.
2),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(Fig.3),anddiseases,
especiallypurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)(Fig.4)and
basalrot(
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.
Hansen)(Fig.5),limittheproductionandproductivityofonionin
thestate.
T.tabaci
isconsideredapestofnationalimportancein
India,causinganannualyieldlossof10Œ15%inonionthrough

feedingdamage(Fig.6)andindirectlythroughpredisposingonion

plantstopurpleblotch(Fig.7)andtransmittingIrisYellowSpot

Virus(IYSV)disease(Guptaetal.1994,Zenetal.2008).Repeated

applicationofinsecticideshasresultedinresistancedevelopment

inonionthripstoinsecticides(AlstonandDrost2008).Leafminers

havebecomeseriouspestson
Alliumsp.inmanypartsoftheworld,
causingeconomicdamagetoonionandothervegetables(Chenet

al.2003).Leafminerproblemsareexacerbatedbyuseofsynthetic

pesticidesthatkillnaturalenemies(Aridaetal.2002b).Yellow

stickytrapshavebeenreportedtobeeffectiveintrappingonion
thrips(Choetal.1995,DemirelandCranshaw2005)andleafminer
adults(Tryonetal.1980,Unmoleetal.1999).Tobaccocutworm,

apolyphagouspest,causesseveredefoliationinonion(Atwaland

Dhaliwal2005).Neemextractsandneemoilhavebeenfoundtobe

effectiveincheckingonionpests(Sonataetal.2005,Sharmaand

Seth2005,Mishraetal.2007,KrishnaKumaretal.2008).
Basalrotisaneconomicallyimportantdiseaseofonionand
generallyoccurswhensoiltemperaturesareverywarm(optimum
29°C).Diseaseincidenceincreaseswhereonionisgrowncontin-

uously.Theearlysymptomsinthefieldareyellowingofleavesand

tipdieback.Asthediseaseprogresses,thewholeplantmaycol-

lapseand,iftheplantispulled,itoftencomesoutwithoutanyroots

attachedbecausetheyhavedecayed.Ifinfectionoccurslateinthe

season,thesymptomsmaynotshowupuntiltheonionsarein

storagebecauseoflatentinfections(Brayford1996).Yieldlosses

of25Œ35%to
Fusariumbasalrothavebeenreportedinonion(Lacy
andRoberts1982).Purpleblotchofonionisaproblemparticularly

duringcoolermonthsasthediseasespreadsrapidlyunderfavor-

ableclimaticconditionscausingseriousyieldlosses(Guptaetal.

1981).Thehumidclimatewithtemperaturesrangingfrom18to

30°Candrelativehumidityof80Œ90%favorsthediseasedevel-

opment.Smallbrownspotswithpurplishcentersarecharacteristic

ofthisdisease.Underfavorableconditions,thespotsformintooval

lesionsthathaveapurplishtintwithconcentricrings.Thelesions

maygirdleleaves/stalkandcausedrying.Theinfectedplantsfail

todevelopbulbs.Olderleavesaremoresusceptibletothedisease.

Thelossinyieldresultingfromthisdiseaseisaround20Œ25%and

theseverityofpurpleblotchinonionisalwayshigherinfieldswith
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from EvaluationofIntegratedPestandDiseaseManagementModuleforShallotsinTamilNadu,
India:aFarmer™sParticipatoryApproach
D.Dinakaran,
1G.Gajendran,
1S.Mohankumar,
2G.Karthikeyan,
3S.Thiruvudainambi,
1E.I.Jonathan,
3R.Samiyappan,
2D.G.Pfeiffer,
4E.G.Rajotte,
5G.W.Norton,
6S.Miller,
7andR.Muniappan
81AnbilDharmalingamAgriculturalCollegeandResearchInstitute,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,DindigulRd.,NavalurKuttapattu,Tiruchirappalli-620009,
India.2CentreforPlantMolecularBiologyandBiotechnology,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
3CentreforPlantProtectionStudies,TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,LawleyRd.,Coimbatore641003,India.
4Correspondingauthor:DepartmentofEntomology,117DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061(e-mail:dgpfeiff@vt.edu).
5DepartmentofEntomology,501ASI,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity,UniversityPark,PA16802.
6DepartmentofAgriculturalandAppliedEconomics,250DrillfieldRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
7DepartmentofPlantPathology,1680MadisonAve.,TheOhioStateUniversity–OARDC,Wooster,OH44691.
8IPM–CRSP,OfficeinInternationalResearch,EducationandDevelopment,526Prices’sForkRd.,VirginiaTech,Blacksburg,VA24061.
J.Integ.PestMngmt.4(2):2013;DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/IPM12019
ABSTRACT.EffortsmadetoevaluatetheIntegratedPestManagement(IPM)moduleforshallotsthroughFarmer’sParticipatory
ApproachinTamilNadu,India,arediscussed.TheshallotIPMmodulewithspecialemphasisonnonchemicalmanagement
componentsviz.,healthyseedbulbselection,seedtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,soilapplicationofbio-pesticidesandbio-inputs,

growingofbarriercrops,installationofstickytrapsandpheromonetraps,sprayapplicationofbio-pesticides,andneed-based

applicationofsyntheticpesticideswereevaluatedinlargefieldsinfarmers’holdingsinsixlocationsduring2009–2012.Inallthe

locations,theIPMfieldsregisteredreducedincidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(5.99
thrips/plant),leafminer(
Liriomyzasp.)(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(3.51%damage),basalrot
(Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.Hansen)(3.50%incidence)andpurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)
(24.50PercentDiseaseIndex)comparedwithfarmer’sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceofonionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),

leafminer(19.65%damage),tobaccocutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch(51.6Percent

DiseaseIndex).TheIPMfieldsregisteredahighermeanbulbyieldof13.81t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:3.05comparedwith

10.69t/hawithacost:benefitratioof1:2.47infarmer’sapproach.Fielddays,exhibitions,anddemonstrationswereorganizedin

allthelocationstopopularizetheshallotIPMmoduleamongthegrowers.
KeyWords:
shallot,shallotpests,shallotdiseases,onion,onionpests
Onion,Alliumcepa
L.(Alliaceae)isoneofthemostimportant
commercialvegetablecropsinIndia,cultivatedinanareaof
756,000ha.Twomaintypesofonions,bulbonion(
Alliumcepa
varietycepa)andshallotormultiplieronion(
Alliumcepa
varietyaggregatum),arecultivatedinIndiawiththeproductionandpro-

ductivityof12.16milliontonnesand16.10tonnes/ha,respectively

(www.nhb.gov.in).InthestateofTamilNadu,thesouthernmost

partofIndia,onioniscultivatedinanareaof30,255hawitha

productionof286,000tonnes.Theshallotisthemostcommontype

ofonioncultivatedinTamilNaduanditiscommonlypropagated

throughbulbs.TheaverageproductivityofonioninTamilNaduis

9.45tonnes/ha(www.tn.gov.in).Insectpests,especiallyonion

thrips(
Thripstabaci
L.)(Fig.1),leafminer(
Liriomyza
sp.)(Fig.
2),tobaccocutworm(
Spodopteralitura
F.)(Fig.3),anddiseases,
especiallypurpleblotch(
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Cif.)(Fig.4)and
basalrot(
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepaeW.C.SnyderandH.N.
Hansen)(Fig.5),limittheproductionandproductivityofonionin
thestate.
T.tabaci
isconsideredapestofnationalimportancein
India,causinganannualyieldlossof10Œ15%inonionthrough

feedingdamage(Fig.6)andindirectlythroughpredisposingonion

plantstopurpleblotch(Fig.7)andtransmittingIrisYellowSpot

Virus(IYSV)disease(Guptaetal.1994,Zenetal.2008).Repeated

applicationofinsecticideshasresultedinresistancedevelopment

inonionthripstoinsecticides(AlstonandDrost2008).Leafminers

havebecomeseriouspestson
Alliumsp.inmanypartsoftheworld,
causingeconomicdamagetoonionandothervegetables(Chenet

al.2003).Leafminerproblemsareexacerbatedbyuseofsynthetic

pesticidesthatkillnaturalenemies(Aridaetal.2002b).Yellow

stickytrapshavebeenreportedtobeeffectiveintrappingonion
thrips(Choetal.1995,DemirelandCranshaw2005)andleafminer
adults(Tryonetal.1980,Unmoleetal.1999).Tobaccocutworm,

apolyphagouspest,causesseveredefoliationinonion(Atwaland

Dhaliwal2005).Neemextractsandneemoilhavebeenfoundtobe

effectiveincheckingonionpests(Sonataetal.2005,Sharmaand

Seth2005,Mishraetal.2007,KrishnaKumaretal.2008).
Basalrotisaneconomicallyimportantdiseaseofonionand
generallyoccurswhensoiltemperaturesareverywarm(optimum
29°C).Diseaseincidenceincreaseswhereonionisgrowncontin-

uously.Theearlysymptomsinthefieldareyellowingofleavesand

tipdieback.Asthediseaseprogresses,thewholeplantmaycol-

lapseand,iftheplantispulled,itoftencomesoutwithoutanyroots

attachedbecausetheyhavedecayed.Ifinfectionoccurslateinthe

season,thesymptomsmaynotshowupuntiltheonionsarein

storagebecauseoflatentinfections(Brayford1996).Yieldlosses

of25Œ35%to
Fusariumbasalrothavebeenreportedinonion(Lacy
andRoberts1982).Purpleblotchofonionisaproblemparticularly

duringcoolermonthsasthediseasespreadsrapidlyunderfavor-

ableclimaticconditionscausingseriousyieldlosses(Guptaetal.

1981).Thehumidclimatewithtemperaturesrangingfrom18to

30°Candrelativehumidityof80Œ90%favorsthediseasedevel-

opment.Smallbrownspotswithpurplishcentersarecharacteristic

ofthisdisease.Underfavorableconditions,thespotsformintooval

lesionsthathaveapurplishtintwithconcentricrings.Thelesions

maygirdleleaves/stalkandcausedrying.Theinfectedplantsfail

todevelopbulbs.Olderleavesaremoresusceptibletothedisease.

Thelossinyieldresultingfromthisdiseaseisaround20Œ25%and

theseverityofpurpleblotchinonionisalwayshigherinfieldswith
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from onionthrips(ThindandJhooty1982,YasodhaandNatarajan
2008).Oniongrowersinthestategenerallyrelyonsyntheticpesticides
likeprofenophos,acephate,imidacloprid,fipronil,chlorpyrifos,

cypermethrinchlorpyrifos,mancozeb,carbendazim,car-
bendazimmancozeb,wettablesulfur,andsoforth,formanage-
mentofpestsanddiseasesandthefrequencyofapplicationsranges

fromsixtoninespraysdependingupontheseasonandpestsand
diseasesload(Selvamuthukumar2011).Repeatedsyntheticpesti-

cidesapplicationsoftenresultinresistancedevelopment,resur-

gence,andnaturalenemydestructionbesidesenvironmentaldeg-

radation(DentandWalton1997
,Thankietal.2003).Oneofthe
challengesofdevelopingandimplementinganIPMmoduleisto

successfullybalancethegoalsofreducingpesticideusewhile

maintainingthecropqualitydemandedbythefarmerandthe

market.Inresponsetothethreatofseveredamageandeconomic

lossbypestsanddiseasesinshallot,theU.S.AgencyforInterna-

tionalDevelopment(USAID)fundedprojectIPMŒCRSP(Inte-

gratedPestManagementŒCollaborativeResearchSupportPro-

gram),inwhichTamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity(TNAU),

Indiaisacollaborator,hasdevelopedanintegratedpestmanage-
Fig.1.
Onionthripsinjurytoshallotleaves.
Fig.2.
Leafminerinjuryinshallotleaf.
Fig.3.
Tobaccocutwormdamageinshallot.
Fig.4.
Lesioninshallotleafcausedbypurpleblotch.
Fig.5.
Symptomofbasalrotinfectioninshallot.
Fig.6.
Onionthripsinfestedshallotfieldpresentingburntup
appearance.2JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENTVOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from ment(IPM)moduleforshallot(Gajendranetal.2011).TheIPM
moduleisbio-intensivewithemphasisonnonchemicalcompo-

nents.TheshallotIPMmodulewastestverifiedinfarmers™hold-

ingsinlargefieldsinsixlocationsfrom2009to2012andcom-

paredwithfarmers™practice,wheretotalrelianceonsynthetic

insecticides(sixtoninespraysindifferentlocations)wasobserved

inmajoroniongrowingtractsofTamilNadu.
StudyMethodsandApproach
ImplementationofIPMModule.
SixlocationsinthestateofTamil
NaduinsouthernIndia,whereshallotisthemajorcropwereselected

fortheprogramandtheIPMmodulewasevaluatedin
Kharif(Juneto
September)and
Rabi(OctobertoFebruary)seasons.
Location1:Irur,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2009Œ2010)
Location2:Ayyalur,DindigulDistrict(
Kharif2010)Location3:Alathur,Perambalurdistrict(
Kharif2010)Location4:Sengattupatti,TrichyDistrict(
Rabi2010Œ2011)
Location5:Sathiramanai,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2010Œ2011)
Location6:Narasingapuram,TrichyDistrict(
Rabi2011Œ2012)Ateachlocation,evaluationoftheIPMmodulewascarriedoutin
areaof0.4haandcomparedwithfarmer™spracticeinanareaof0.4

ha.ThecommonlygrownshallotcultivaroftheregionCo4wasused

inallthelocations.
TheIPMŒCRSPprogramworkingwithTamilNaduAgricultural
University(TNAU)hasdevelopedIPMmoduletosolvepestand

diseaseproblemsinshallotwithemphasisonbio-pesticidesandbe-

havioralapproaches.TheIPMŒCRSP-TNAUprogramhasstrongly

promotedthetransferofshallotIPMmoduletogrowersbyaggressive

technologytransferprograms.ThedetailsofIPMmoduleandtech-

nologytransferactivitiesarediscussed.Selectionofexperimental

fieldsinoniongrowingregionswasmadewiththeassistanceof

extensionofficialsoftheStateDepartmentofAgriculture/Horticul-

tureintherespectiveareas.ThedetailsofIPMmodulearediscussed

below.BulbSelectionandTreatment.
Selectionofhealthybulbsforplant-
ing(Fig.8)isimportantasthebasalrotcausedby
Fusariumsp.isboth
afieldandstoragefungus(CoskuntunaandOzer2008).Basalrot

incidenceisoneofthemajorcausesforpoorfieldstandasitcauses

rottingoftheplantintheearlystageofthecropgrowth.Healthy

(diseasefree)seedbulbsweremanuallyselectedfromstoredseed

onionbeforeplanting.
Pseudomonasfluorescens
andTrichodermaviride
haveprovento
beeffectivebio-controlagentsagainstbasalrotpathogen(Malathiand

Mohan2011).Theseantagonisticorganismsinducesystemicresis-

tanceinplantsandinadditionpromoteplantgrowth(Rajendranand

Ranganathan1996,BennettandWhipps2008,Bennettetal.2009).

Onionbulbtreatmentwith
P.fluorescens
(Pf1TNAUformulation)(5
g/kg)T.viride
(TNAUformulation)(5g/kg)in20mlofwater/kg
ofseedbulbswasappliedbeforeplanting.Thebio-suspensionwas
sprinkledovertheseedbulbsandmanuallyturnedforuniformcoating

ofthebio-pesticidesovertheseedbulbs.
SoilAmendmentsWithBio-Products.
Fieldapplicationofbio-
pesticidesreducessoil-bornepathogenslike
Fusariumandpromotes
buildupofantagonisticorganismsandpromotesplantgrowth(Cham-

pawatandSharma2003,AltintasandBal2008,CoskuntunaandOzer

2008).Applicationofbio-fertilizersandArbuscularMycorrhizalFun-

gus(AMF)promotesplantgrowthandconfersresistancetobiotic

stress(SrivastavaandTiwari2003).AMFhasbeenshowntoincrease

resistancetoroot-infectingpathogenicfungilike
Fusariumspp.and
rootinvadingnematodes(Lindermann1994).Neemcakeapplication

hasbeeneffectiveincheckingpestsanddiseasebesidespromoting

plantgrowth(RukmaniandMariappan1990,ChakrabartiandSen

1991).Consideringthebeneficialaspectsofthebio-inputs,thefol-

lowingbio-inputsviz.
P.fluorescens
(TNAUformulation)(1.25kg/
ha),T.viride
(TNAUformulation)(1.25kg/ha),Azophos(TNAU
formulationofAzospirillum
Phosphobacteria)(4kg/ha),AMF
(TNAUformulation)(12.5kg/ha),andNeemcake(commercialgrade

neemseedoilcake)(250kg/ha)werethoroughlymixedandapplied

uniformlyinthefieldbeforeplanting(Fig.9).
MaizeasBarrierCrop.
Growingmaizeasabarriercrophasbeen
effectiveinpreventingtheentryofonionthripstoonionfieldsandin

theconservationofcoccinellidpopulations(SrinivasandLawande

2002).Inthecurrentstudy,TNAUmaizehybridCoH(M)5wassown

closelyintworowsallalongthefieldborderatthetimeofshallot

planting.PheromoneandStickyTraps.
Sexpheromonetrapsareusefultools
formonitoring,masstrapping,andtimingofinsecticidalapplicationin

themanagementofcutworms,
Spodopteraspp.inonion(Aridaetal.
2002a).Sleevetypepheromonetraps(suppliedbyM/sGrenicon

AgrotechPrivateLtd.,Chennai,India)baitedwithpheromonelureof
Fig.7.
Combinedinfectionofpurpleblotchandonionthrips.
Fig.8.
Womenfarmersengagedinselectionofdiseasefreeseed
bulbsforplanting.
Fig.9.
Mixingofbio-inputsforsoilapplicationbeforeplanting.
JUNE2013DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS3
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from S.litura
wereinstalledintheIPMfieldsat12/haandthelureswere
replacedevery2wk.Yellowstickytraps(Highwayyellowshade
polyethylenefilmof30cmheightand90cmlengthsmearedwith

clearcastoroil)wereinstalledat12/hajustabovethecropcanopy

usingwoodenpolesatbothends(Fig.10).Theoilwaschangedeach

weektoensureadequatetrapping.
FoliarApplicationofBio-Pesticides.
Normallyonionthripsinfest
shallots4wkafterplanting.Afoliarsprayof
P.fluorescens
(5g/lit)
andBeauveriabassiana
(10g/lit)wasappliedon30thdayofplanting
forthemanagementofonionthripsintheearlystage.
B.bassiana
aloneandincombinationwithotherbio-pesticideshasbeenreported

tobeeffectiveagainstonionthrips(Thungrabeabetal.2006,Almaz-

raawietal.2009).Acommercialformulationofneemcontaining1%

(10,000ppm)azadirachtinwassprayedat2ml/literon40thdayafter

plantingforthemanagementofinsectpests.
FoliarApplicationofSyntheticPesticides.
Syntheticpesticideap-
plicationwascarriedoutinIPMfieldsonlyonneedbasisand

insecticides(profenophos50EC[2ml/liter],triazophos50EC[2

ml/liter],anddimethoate30EC[(2ml/liter])weresprayedforthe

managementofonionthrips,leafminer,andcutworms.Thesesyn-

theticinsecticideswereappliedwhenonionthripspopulation,

leafminer,andtobaccocutwormdamagecrossed10thrips/plant,10%

leafdamage,and5%infestedplants,respectively.Forthemanage-

mentofpurpleblotchdisease,sprayapplicationoftebuconazole250

EC(1.5ml/liter)ormancozeb75WP(2.0g/liter)wasmadeafterthe

initialappearanceofthediseaseasitspreadsquicklyandcauses

severedamagewithinashortperiod.
SamplingandObservations.
Fivemicroplotsof20m
2werecho-
senineachtreatmentforrecordingobservationsonpestsand

diseasesinallthesixlocations.Ineachmicroplot,onionthrips

populationwascountedfrom10randomlyselectedplants.

Leafminerdamagewasassessedbycountingtotalnumberofleaves

andinfestedleavesfrom10randomlyselectedplants.Tobacco

cutwormdamagewasassessedbycountingthetotalnumberof

plantsineachmicroplotanddamagedplants.Incidenceofbasalrot

wasassessedbycountingthetotalnumberofplantsineach

microplotandinfectedplantsandexpressedaspercentincidence.

Purpleblotchincidencewasassessedfrom10randomlyselected

plantsineachmicroplotbyfollowinga0Œ9ratingscaleandthe

severitywasexpressedasPercentDiseaseIndex(PDI).
Farmer™sApproachComparison
Theshallotgrowersintheprojectareagenerallyusedsynthetic
insecticidesandfungicidesforpestanddiseasemanagement.The

numberofsprayswithsyntheticpesticidesinfarmer™spracticeranged

from6to9indifferentlocationsdependingupontheseverityofpests

anddiseasesindifferentseasons.Noneofthefarmersintheexperi-

mentallocationadoptedhealthybulbselection,bulbtreatment,bio-

pesticide/bio-fertilizerapplication,stickytrap,andpheromonetrap

installation.Generalagronomicpracticeslikeplowing,planting,manuring,
irrigation,weeding,andsoforth,werecarriedoutaspertherecom-

mendationsoftheCropProductionTechniquesofHorticulturalCrops

2004inbothIPMandfarmers™approachfields(Anonymous2004).

Theexpenditureincurredinraisingbarriercropofmaizeandthe

incomerealizedthroughmaizewastakenintoaccountincalculating

costbenefitratioofIPMfields.
DataAnalysis.
Theexperimentaldataweresubjectedtoanalysisof
variance(ANOVA)fordeterminingthelevelofsignificance(Gomez

andGomez1984).Ineachlocation,themicroplotsservedasreplicates

foreachtreatmentandobservationsineachlocationwerecompared

statisticallybypaired
t-test.Themeanvaluesofpestanddisease
incidence,bulbyieldandeconomicsofeachlocationweretreatedas

replicatesandtheoverallmeanofsixlocationswerecomparedsta-

tisticallybyANNOVA.
MajorFindings
PestsandDiseases
LocationI.Irur,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2009–2010
).
Theresults
revealedthattheIPMfieldregisteredminimumpopulationofonion
thrips(10.81
0.49thrips/plant),reducedleafinjurybyleafminer
(13.200.60%damage)andtobaccocutworm(5.48
0.31%damage)comparedwithahigherthripspopulation(14.85
0.60thrips/plant),leafminer(23.61
1.05%damage),andtobaccocut-
worm(9.13
0.68%damage)infestationinfarmer™spractice.Inci-
denceofbasalrotwasfoundtobelowerinIPMfields(1.8
0.34%)ascomparedwith5.6
0.40%incidenceinfarmer™spractice.Oc-
currenceofpurpleblotchwasnoticedinboththefieldsandthe

severitywasexpressedinPDIanditwaslesser(20.0
1.13PDI)in
IPMfieldwhencomparedwithfarmer™sapproachwhichrecordeda

diseaseseverityof45.6
1.59PDI(Table1).
LocationII.Ayyalur,DindigulDistrict(
Kharif2010
).
Onionthrips,
tobaccocutworm,andbasalrotalonewerenoticedintheexperimental

fieldsandallthesepestsanddiseaseswereregisteredatreducedlevel

inIPMfieldthaninfarmer™sapproach.Thepercentreductionofonion

thripspopulation,tobaccocutwormdamage,andbasalrotincidencein

IPMfieldoverfarmer™sapproachwas65.7,39.4,and52.0,respec-

tively(Table1).
LocationIII.Alathur,PerambalurDistrict(
Kharif2010
).
Themean
onionthripspopulationinIPMfieldwas4.85
0.37/plantcompared
with10.22
0.48/plantinfarmer™sapproachandthebasalrot
incidencewaslesserinIPMfield(4.80
0.60%)ascomparedwith
12.300.92%infarmer™sapproach.Incidenceofpurpleblotch,
tobaccocutworm,andleafminerwasnotobservedintheexperimental

fieldsduringtheseason(Table1).
LocationIV.Sengattupatti,TiruchirappalliDistrict(
Rabi2010–11
).
ThemeanonionthripspopulationinIPMfieldwas8.30
0.44/plantcomparedwith15.95
0.98/plantinfarmer™sapproach.
Leafminerinfestationwasobservedtoanextentof13.76
0.53%damageinIPMfieldcomparedwith19.80
0.86%infarmer™s
approach.Cutwormdamagewas3.92
0.35%inIPMfieldanditwas
6.850.57%infarmer™sapproach.Incidenceofbasalrotwasnoticed
toanextentof2.29
0.47%inIPMfieldasagainst5.04
0.67%infarmer™sapproach.Theseverityofpurpleblotchwas24.4
1.68PDIinIPMfieldasagainst46.7
1.15PDIinfarmer™sapproach
(Table1).
LocationV.Sathiramanai,PerambalurDistrict(
Rabi2010–11
).
AdoptionofIPMmoduleregisteredlessermeanonionthripspopu-

lation(1.71
0.31thrips/plant),leafminerinjury(13.57
0.67%damage)andcutworminjury(4.83
0.54%damage)comparedwith
farmer™sapproachwith4.33
0.43thrips/plant,18.88
0.93%leafminerinjury,and7.35
0.54%cutwormdamage.Theincidence
ofbasalrotwaslesserinIPMfieldwith1.71
0.32%ascompared
with4.33
0.48%infarmer™sapproach.Theseverityofpurpleblotch
inIPMfieldwas31.1
0.82PDIasagainst57.8
1.07PDIin
farmer™sapproach(Table1).
Fig.10.
Installationofyellowstickytrapsinshallotfield.
4JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENTVOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from LocationVI.Narasingapuram,TiruchirappalliDistrict(
Rabi2011–12).
AtNarasingapuramlocation,adoptionofIPMmodule
reducedtheincidenceofshallotpestsanddiseasesasinotherloca-
tionsandthepercentreductionoverfarmer™sapproachrangedfrom

39.7to61.5%.InIPMfield,thepopulationofonionthripsandinjury

byleafminersandcutwormswerereducedby51.8,39.7,and61.5%,

respectively.Similarly,theseverityofbasalrotandpurpleblotchwere

alsoreducedstatisticallybyadoptionofIPMmodule,registering51.7

and60.1%,respectively(Table1).
Theoverallmeanofallthesixlocationsalsorevealedthereduced
incidenceofthemajorinsectpestsanddiseasesviz.onionthrips(5.99

thrips/plant),leafminer(12.59%damage),tobaccocutworm(3.51%dam-

age),basalrot(3.50%incidence),andpurpleblotch(24.50PDI)inIPM

fieldcomparedwithfarmer™sapproachregisteringhigherincidenceof

onionthrips(11.58thrips/plant),leafminer(19.65%damage),tobacco

cutworm(6.22%damage),basalrot(8.14%incidence),andpurpleblotch

(51.6PDI)(Fig.11).
BulbYieldandEconomics.
Itwasevidentfromtheresultsofallthe
sixlocationsthattheadoptionofshallotIPMmodulesignificantly

enhancedthebulbyieldtothetuneof20.2(locationII)to47.0

(locationI)percentoverfarmer™sapproach.InlocationI,IPMfield

registeredsignificantlyhigherbulbyield(15.62
0.90t/ha)thanthe
farmer™sapproach(12.13
0.84t/ha).AdoptionofIPMmodule
enhancedtheshallotbulbyield(12.50
0.46t/ha)asagainstfarmer™s
approach(10.40
0.68t/ha)inlocationIIwithacostbenefitratioof
1:1.73.InlocationIII,higherbulbyieldof13.60
0.77t/hawas
recordedinIPMfieldthatissignificantlysuperioroverfarmer™s
approachregistering11.20
0.60t/ha.Thesametrendcontinuedin
locationsIV,V,andVIalsoregisteringhigherbulbyieldsof14.58
0.92t/ha,12.90
0.70t/ha,and13.64
0.70t/ha,respectivelyin
IPMfieldscomparedwithfarmer™sapproachthatrecordedsignifi-

cantlyreducedyields(Table2).Thecostbenefitratioinallthe

locationsrangedfrom1:1.73(locationII)to1:6.36(locationIV)in

IPMfieldscomparedwith1:1.41(locationI)to1:5.42(locationIV)

infarmer™sapproach(Fig.12).Thewidevariationinthecostbenefit

ratioofIPMfieldandfarmer™sapproachbetweenseasonsisbecause

ofhighfluctuationinthemarketpriceofshallot.
Analysis(ANOVA)ofmeanvaluesofsixlocationsrevealed
thattheadoptionofIPMmoduleinshallotwassignificantly

superioroverfarmer™spracticeinreducingtheincidenceofonion

thripspopulation(5.99
1.37thrips/plantvs.11.58
1.78thrips/plant),leaf-miner(12.59
0.93%damagevs.19.65
2.20%damage),tobaccocutworm(3.51
0.82%damagevs.
6.221.22%damage),basalrot(3.5
0.88%vs.8.14
1.82%),andpurpleblotch(24.5
2.39PDIvs.51.6
3.15PDI)(Table
1).TheIPMfieldsregisteredsignificantlyahighermeanbulbyield

of13.81
0.47t/hawithacostbenefitratioof1:3.05
0.78comparedwith10.69
0.43t/hawithacostbenefitratioof
1:2.470.68infarmer™sapproach(Table2).
ShallotIPMModuleDissemination
Normally,theoniongrowersofTamilNadugettechnicalad-
visoryservicesfromthelocalextensionfunctionariesoftheState

DepartmentofAgriculture/HorticultureandKrishiVigyanKend-
Table1.EvaluationofShallotIPMmodulethroughfarmer™sparticipatoryapproach
TreatmentThripspopulation
(no./plant)Leafminerdamage
(%)Tobaccocutworm
damage(%)
Basalrotincidence
(%)Purpleblotch(PDI)
LocationI(
Rabi
2009–2010)IPMfield10.81
0.4913.20
0.605.48
0.311.80
0.3420.0
1.13Farmer’sapproach14.85
0.6023.61
1.059.13
0.685.60
0.4045.6
1.59Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach27.244.140.067.956.1
LocationII(
Kharif2010)IPMfield
3.360.27—0.970.187.250.91—Farmer’sapproach
9.800.53—1.600.1915.10
1.28—Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach65.739.452.0LocationIII(
Kharif2010)IPMfield
4.850.37——4.800.60—Farmer’sapproach
10.220.48——12.300.92—Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach52.561.0LocationIV(
Rabi2010–2011)IPMfield
8.300.4413.76
0.533.92
0.352.290.4724.4
1.68Farmer’sapproach
15.950.9819.80
0.866.85
0.575.040.6746.7
1.15Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach48.030.542.854.647.8LocationV(
Rabi2010–2011)IPMfield
1.710.3113.57
0.674.83
0.541.710.3231.1
0.82Farmer’sapproach
4.330.4318.88
0.937.35
0.544.330.4857.8
1.07Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach60.528.134.360.546.2LocationVI(
Rabi2011–2012)IPMfield
6.920.719.83
0.672.37
0.283.120.5422.4
0.96Farmer’sapproach
14.350.6016.29
0.936.15
0.486.460.6156.1
1.06Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach51.839.761.551.760.1Overallmean
IPMfield
5.991.3712.59
0.93(20.72)3.51
0.82(10.43)3.50
0.88(10.91)24.5
2.39(30.93)
Farmer’sapproach
11.581.7819.65
2.20(26.26)6.22
1.22(14.02)8.14
1.82(16.61)51.6
3.15(45.90)
Percentdecreaseoverfarmer’s
approach48.335.943.657.052.5S.Ed.
0.810.800.640.632.05C.D.(
P0.05)2.082.551.771.626.51Figuresinparenthesesare
arcsinetransformedvalues.
S.Ed.,standarderrorofdifference;C.D.,criticaldifferenceat5%levelamongthevaluesgiveninparentheses.
JUNE2013
DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS
5 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from ras(KVK)(FarmScienceCenters)oftheStateAgriculturalUni-
versity.However,theseareinadequateconsideringthecomplexity

ofthepestsanddiseasesproblemsandexpertiseavailableinthe

extensiondepartments.Hence,theIPMŒCRSPteamoftheTNAU

joinedhandswiththeextensionofficials,KVKandAllIndiaRadio

(AIM)forspeedydisseminationoftheIPMmoduleamongthe

shallotgrowers.
Methoddemonstrationsonseedbulbtreatmentwithbio-pesticides,
soilapplicationofbio-inputsandneemcake,installationofyellow

stickytrapsandpheromonetrapsinthefieldwereorganizedinallthe

locationstodisseminatetheeco-friendlytechnologiesofshallotIPM

tofarmingcommunity.
Inallthesixlocations,fielddaysandexhibitionswereorganized
atthetimeofharvestingtopopularizebio-intensiveIPMmodule

amongtheshallotgrowers.Farmers-Scientistsinteractivesessionand
feedback(sharingofexperiences)bythefarmerswholaidout

demonstrationtrialswerealsoorganized.
Topopularizethebio-inputsviz.,
T.viride
,
P.fluorescens
,pher-
omonetrapsandyellowstickytrapsamongthegrowers,freedistri-

butionoftheseinputswasmadetogrowerswherethedemonstration

trialswereconducted(Figs.13and14).Besides,pamphletsonshallot

IPMmodulewaspreparedinlocallanguageanddistributedtogrowers

fordisseminationoftechnology.DisseminationofshallotIPMmodule

throughpublicationinlocalnewspapers,journalsweremadetopop-

ularizethetechnologyamongtheshallotgrowers.
AFarmSchoolprogramonradiowasorganizedunderthe
USAIDIPMŒCRSPprograminvolvingtheDirectorateofExten-

sionEducation,TNAU,andAllIndiaRadio,Tiruchirappalli.In

total,1,447vegetablegrowersfromalloverTamilNadustate

registeredandbenefiteddirectly.Besides,thebroadcastcovered
Fig.11.
ImpactofshallotIPMModuleonpestanddiseaseincidence(meanofsixlocations).
Fig.12.
ImpactofshallotIPMModuleonbulbyieldandeconomics(meanofsixlocations).
Table2.EffectofShallotIPMmoduleonbulbyieldandcostbenefitratio
TreatmentLocationI(
Rabi2009–2010)
LocationII
(Kharif2010)LocationIII
(Kharif2010)LocationIV(
Rabi2010–2011)
LocationV(
Rabi2010–2011)
LocationVI(
Rabi2011–2012)Overallmean
Bulbyield(t/ha)
IPMfield
15.620.9012.50
0.4613.60
0.7714.58
0.9212.90
0.7013.64
0.7013.81
0.47Farmer’sapproach
12.130.8410.40
0.6811.20
0.6011.28
0.729.87
0.689.28
0.6210.69
0.43Percentincreaseoverfarmer’s
approach28.820.221.4
29.330.747.029.2S.Ed.
0.33C.D.(
P0.05)0.85Costbenefitratio
IPMfield
1:1.841:1.731:1.961:6.36
1:4.401:1.981:3.05
0.78Farmer’sapproach
1:1.411:1.481:1.611:5.42
1:3.501:1.391:2.47
0.68S.Ed.,standarderrorofdifference;C.D.,criticaldifferenceat5%levelamongthevaluesgiveninparentheses.
6JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENT
VOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from nearly70%oftheareainTamilNadustate,benefittingthousands
ofoniongrowers.InJanuary2012,alargegrowermeetingwas

heldattheTiruchirappallicampusofTNAUtocelebratethe

successoftheAIMradioseriesandtheproductionofashallotIPM
manual,supportedbyIPMŒCRSPatTNAU.Approximately600

TamilNadufarmersattended,andsomeoftheparticipatingfarm-

ersgavetestimonialsontheimportanceoftheextensioneffortsto

theirfarming(Figs.15Œ17).Inaddition,variousTNAUbooths

furtherillustratedIPMŒCRSPmethods,includingsomecreatedby

TNAUundergraduatestudents(Fig.18).
AdoptionofShallotIPMApproach.
Assessmentofimpactofshallot
IPMmoduledemonstrationsanddisseminationactivitiesonthepro-
ductionandproductivityofshallotintheareaswheretheseactivities

werecarriedoutrevealedthatthefarmershaverealizedreduced

productioncost(2.60%),increasedbulbproduction(19.28%),and

highereconomicreturns(23.89%)overtheconventionalfarmer™s

approachwherethetotalreliancewasonsyntheticchemicalpesti-

cides.ThelackofanIPMstrategyinshallotproductionwasovercome

throughourapproachundertheIPMŒCRSPprogramandithasbeen

popularizedinmajorshallotgrowingareasofTamilNadu,India.

Thoughsomeoftheprogressivefarmersadoptedtheentirepackage,
Fig.13.
Distributionofyellowstickytrapstoshallotgrowersduring
FieldDay.
Fig.14.
Distributionofbio-pesticidestoshallotgrowersduringField
Day.Fig.15.
WelcomesignforarrivingparticipantsinTamilNadufarmer
meetingcelebratingIPMradioseriesproducedbyAllIndiaRadio
(AIM),TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity(TNAU),andtheSouth

AsianregionalprojectoftheIPM–CRSP.
Fig.16.
FarmerprovidingcommentsonthevalueofIPMlessons
providedoverAIR.
Fig.17.
TamilNadufarmersgatheredforIPMcelebrationat
TNAU–Trichy.Fig.18.
TNAUundergraduatesatdioramaillustratingseveralIPM
toolsdevelopedbyIPM–CRSPinSouthAsia(pheromonetrapping,

yellowstickytraps,maizebordercrops,andsoilbiopesticides).
JUNE2013DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS7
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from fewmajorcomponentsoftheshallotIPMmoduleviz.,selectionof
healthyseedbulbs,bulbtreatmentwith
Pseudomonasfluorescens
andTrichodermaviride,
soilapplicationof
PseudomonasandTricho-dermaalongwithneemcakeandsprayapplicationofazadirachtinare
adoptedbymostoftheshallotgrowersoftheregion.Theother

componentslikegrowingofmaizeasbordercropandinstallationof

trapsarebeingadoptedonasmallerscale.However,effortsarebeing

madetopopularizethesetechnologiesinshallotgrowingareasunder

theIPMŒCRSPprogram.
WeconcludethatamajorconstraintinshallotproductioninTamil
Nadu,India,hasbeenalackofIPMstrategiestoreplacepesticide-

relianttacticsandthefailuretoadopttheIPMstrategiesdeveloped.

TheIPMŒCRSPshallotprogramhasbeenabletoovercomebothof

theseconstraintsbydevelopingapackageofIPMmoduleandsuc-

cessfullytransferringittoonionfarmers.TheIPMmoduleforshallot

developedbyIndianandUnitedStatesscientistsunderUSAIDfunded

IPMŒCRSPprojectwasevaluatedthroughFarmer™sParticipatory

ApproachinTamilNadu,India.TheshallotIPMmoduleevaluatedin

largefields(farmers™holdings)insixlocationsduring2009Œ2012

registeredreducedincidenceofthemajorpestsanddisease,especially

onionthrips,leafminer,tobaccocutworm,basalrot,andpurpleblotch

coupledwithhigherbulbyieldandcostbenefitratiocomparedwith

farmers™approach.WithaviewtopopularizetheshallotIPMmodule

amongtheshallotgrowers,IPMFieldDays,exhibitions,andmethod

demonstrationswereorganizedinallthelocations.Womenfarmers,

whoareengagedinshallotcultivationactivelyparticipatedandinter-

actedwiththescientists.PopularizationtheshallotIPMmodulewas

alsomadethroughnewsmagazines,AllIndiaRadioandtechnical

bulletins.AcknowledgmentsThispublicationwasmadepossiblethroughsupportprovidedby
theAgricultureOfficewithintheBureauforEconomicGrowth,Ag-
riculture,andTrade(EGAT)oftheU.S.AgencyforInternational

Development,underthetermsoftheIPMŒCRSP(AwardEPP-A-00-

04-00016-00).Theopinionsexpressedhereinarethoseoftheauthor

anddonotnecessarilyreflecttheviewsoftheU.S.Agencyfor

InternationalDevelopment.
ReferencesCited
Almazraawi,M.S.,A.Al-Abbadi,M.A.Shatnawi,andM.Ateyyat.2009.
Effectofapplicationmethodontheinteractionbetween
Beauveriabassiana
andneemtreeextractwhencombinedfor
Thripstabaci
(Thysanoptera:Thripidae)control.JournalofFood,AgricultureandEnvironment7:869Œ
873.Alston,D.G.,andD.Drost.2008.Onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
),PestFact
Sheet,UtahStateUniversityExtensionandUtahPestDiagnosticLabora-

tory.Altintas,S.,andU.Bal.2008.Effectsofthecommercialproductbasedon
Trichodermaharzianum
onplant,bulbandyieldcharacteristicsofonion.
ScientiaHorticulturae116:219Œ222.
Anonymous.2004.Cropproductiontechniquesofhorticulturalcrops2004.
DirectorateofHorticultureandPlantationCrops,ChennaiandTamilNadu

AgriculturalUniversity,Coimbatore,TamilNadu,India.
Arida,G.S.,B.S.Punzal,C.C.RavinaJr.,V.P.Gapud,E.G.Rajotte,and
N.S.Talekar.2002a.Sexpheromonesinpestmanagementmonitoringadult

densitiesof
Spodopteralitura
(F.)S.exigua
(Hu¨bner)(Lepidoptera:Noc-
tuidae)inriceonioncroppingsystems.PhilRiceTechnicalBulletin6:

36Œ40.
Arida,G.S.,C.C.RavinaJr.,B.S.Punzal,E.G.Rajotte,andN.S.Talekar.
2002b.Populationdynamicsoftheonionleaf-miner,
Liriomyzatrifolii
(Burgess)insprayedandunsprayedfields.Posterpresentedatthe35thPest

ManagementCouncilofthePhilippinesConference,May8Œ10,Davao

City,Philippines.
Atwal,A.S.,andG.S.Dhaliwal.2005.AgriculturalpestsofSouthAsiaand
theirManagement:pestsofvegetables.KalyaniPublishers,NewDelhi,

India.Bennett,A.J.,A.Mead,andJ.M.Whipps.2009.Performanceofcarrotand
onionseedprimedwithbeneficialmicroorganismsinglasshouseandfield

trials.BiologicalControl51:417Œ426.
Bennett,A.J.,andJ.M.Whipps.2008.Beneficialmicroorganismsurvivalon
seed,rootsandinrhizospheresoilfollowingapplicationtoseedduringdrum
priming.BiologicalControl44:349Œ361.
Brayford,D.1996.
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepae.Mycopathologia133:
39Œ40.
Chakrabarti,S.K.,andB.Sen.1991.Suppressionof
Fusariumwiltofmusk-
melon.IndianPhytopathology44:476Œ479.
Champawat,R.S.,andR.S.Sharma.2003.Integratedmanagementofnursery
diseasesinbrinjal,chilli,cabbageandonion.JournalofMycologyandPlant

Pathology33:290Œ291.
Chen,X.X.,X.Y.Lang.,Z.H.Xu.,J.H.He,andY.Ma.2003.Theoccurrence
ofleafminersandtheirparasitoidsonvegetablesandweedsinHangzhou

area,SoutheastChina.BiologicalControl48:515Œ527.
Cho,K.,C.S.Eckel,J.F.Walgenbach,andG.G.Kennedy.1995.Comparison
ofcoloredstickytrapsformonitoringthripspopulations(Thysanoptera:
Thripidae)instakedtomatofields.JournalofEntomologyandScience30:

176Œ190.
Coskuntuna,A.,andN.Ozer.2008.Biologicalcontrolofonionbasalrot
diseaseusing
Trichodermaharzianum
andinductionofantifungalcom-
poundsinonionsetfollowingseedtreatment.CropProtection27:

330Œ336.
Demirel,N.,andW.Cranshaw.2005.Attractionofcolourtrapsto
Thripsspecies(Thysanoptera:Thripidae)onbrassicacropsinColorado.Pakistan

JournalofBiologyandScience8:1247Œ1249.
Dent,D.R.,andM.P.Walton.1997.Methodsinecologicalandagricultural
entomology.CABIPublishing,Wallingford,UK.
Gajendran,G.,D.Dinakaran,S.Mohankumar,G.Karthikeyan,andV.Jayabal.
2011.Developmentandpopularizationofintegratedpestanddiseaseman-

agementmoduleinonion,pp.238Œ239.
InSouvenirand(abstr.)ofNational
SymposiumonﬁAlliums:CurrentScenarioandEmergingTrendsﬂorgan-

isedbyIndianSocietyofAlliumsandDirectorateofOnionandGarlic,

Pune,India,12Œ14March2011.
Gomez,K.A.,andA.A.Gomez.1984.Statisticalproceduresforagricultural
research(2nded.).Wiley,Inc.NewYork,NY.
Gupta,R.P.,V.B.Pandey,D.K.Srivastava,andL.Singh.1981.Bioassayof
fungicidesagainst
Alternariaporri
(Ellis)Neergcausingpurpleblotchof
onion.Pesticides75:27Œ28.
Gupta,R.P.,K.J.Srivastava,U.B.Pandey,andD.J.Midmore.1994.Diseases
andinsectpestsofonioninIndia.ActaHorticulture358:265Œ372.
Sonata,K.,S.Aurelija,T.Vytautas,A.Algirdas,Z.Algimantas.2005.The
effectivenessofinsecticideNeemazalT/S1%E.C.forprotectionof

commonChinaAster(
Callistephuschinensis
(L.)seedlingsagainst
onionthrips(
Thripstabaci
(Lindeman).RuralDevelopment-Technology
ofProgressiveFarming:TechnicalandTechnologicalSolutions,55:

27Œ28.KrishnaKumar,N.K.,P.N.Krishnamoorthy,C.M.Kalleshwaraswamy,and
H.R.Ranganath.2008.Managementofthrips(
Thripstabaci
Lindeman)on
organicallyraisedroseonion.PestManagementinHorticulturalEcosystems

14:128Œ132.
Lacy,M.L.,andD.L.Roberts.1982.Yieldsofonionentriesinmidwestern
organicsoilsinfestedwith
Fusariumoxysporum
f.spcepaeandPyreno-chaetaterrestris.
PlantDisease66:1003Œ1006.
Lindermann,R.G.1994.RoleofVAMfungiinbiocontrol,pp.1Œ25.
InF.L.
PflegerandR.G.Lindermann(eds.),MycorrhizaeandPlantHealth.APS

Press,St.Paul,MN.
Malathi,S.,andS.Mohan.2011.Evaluationofbiocontrolagentsandorganic
amendmentsagainstonionbasalrotcausedby
Fusariumoxysporum
f.sp.
cepae.MadrasAgricultureJournal98:382Œ385.
Mishra,D.K.,GopeshPathak,R.S.Tailor,andAlokDeshwal.2007.On-farm
trial:anapproachformanagementofthripsinonion.IndianRes.J.Ext.Ed.

7:66Œ67.
Rajendran,K.,andK.Ranganathan.1996.Biologicalcontrolofonionbasalrot
(F.oxysporumf.sp.cepae
)bycombinedapplicationoffungalandbacterial

antagonists.JournalofBiologicalControl10:97Œ102.
Rukmani,S.,andV.Mariappan.1990.Influenceoforganicamendmentswith
Trichodermaviride
onthecontrolofrootrotofblackgram.PlantDisease
Research5:244.
Selvamuthukumar,G.2011.Studiesonseasonalincidenceandmanagementof
onionpests.M.Sc.(Ag.)thesis.TamilNaduAgriculturalUniversity,Co-

imbatore,India.
Sharma,A.K.,andR.K.Seth.2005.Combinedeffectofgammaradiationand
azadirachtinonthegrowthanddevelopmentof
Spodopteralitura
F.Current
Science89:1027Œ1031.
Srinivas,P.S.,andK.E.Lawande.2002.Barriercropping:anewmethodfor
themanagementofthripsinonion.
InProceedingsofInternationalConfer-
enceonVegetables
.Nov11Œ14,2002,Bangalore,India.
Srivastava,K.J.,andB.K.Tiwari.2003.Nurserydiseasemanagementin
8JOURNALOFINTEGRATEDPESTMANAGEMENT
VOL.4,NO.2
 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from onionwithbiocontrolandplantproducts.NationalHorticulturalResearch
andDevelopmentFoundationNewsletter23:5Œ8.
Thanki,K.V.,G.P.Patel,andJ.R.Patel.2003.Populationdynamicsof
Spodopteralitura
oncastor,
Ricinuscommunis
.IndianJournalofEntomol-
ogy65:347Œ350.
Thind,T.S.,andJ.S.Jhooty.1982.Associationofthripswithpurpleblotch
infectionononionplantscausedby
Alternariaporri.
IndianPhytopathology
35:696Œ698.
Thungrabeab,M.,P.Blaser,andC.Sengonca.2006.Possibilitiesforbiocontrol
oftheonionthrips,
Thripstabaci
Lindeman(Thysanoptera,Thripidae)using
differententomopathogenicfungifromThailand.JournalofPlantDisease
andProtection13:181Œ187.
Tryon,E.H.Jr.,S.L.Poe,andH.L.Cromroy.1980.Dispersalofvegetable
leaf-minerontotransplantproductionrange.FloridaEntomology63:292Œ
296.Unmole,L.,D.Abeeluck,andR.Seetohul.1999.Yellowstickytrapsasa
monitoringtoolforeffectivecontrolofleafminersinonion.Foodand

AgriculturalResearchCouncil.Reduit,Mauritius.
Yasodha,P.,andN.Natarajan.2008.Managementofonionandgarlicthrips
(Thripstabaci
)andflowerthrips(
Frankliniellaoccidentalis).
RashtriyaKrishi.3:30Œ31.
Zen,S.,M.Okuda,S.Fuji,andT.Iwanami.2008.Theseasonaloccurrenceof
viruliferousThripstabaci
andtheincidenceofIrisyellowspotvirusdisease
onlisianthus.JournalofPlantPathology90:511Œ515.
Received16September2012;accepted6June2013.
JUNE2013
DINAKARANETAL.:PARTICIPATORYIPMINTAMILNADUSHALLOTS
9 by guest on September 21, 2016http://jipm.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 