Gradient effect on farmers’ income in the mountain areas and its implication
for poverty alleviation strategies: Empirical analysis from the upper reach of
Minjiang River, China | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to sections
![](https://ssl-springer.met.vgwort.de/na/pw-
vgzm.415900-10.1007-s11629-012-2364-z) This service is more advanced with
JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org Search *
Home * Contact Us * Log in Search Tell us about your experience on
SpringerLink and you could **win a MacBook Pro.** Take survey. Download PDF
![Journal of Mountain Science](https://static-
content.springer.com/cover/journal/11629/9/6.jpg) Journal of Mountain Science
December 2012, Volume 9, Issue 6, pp 869–878 # Gradient effect on farmers’
income in the mountain areas and its implication for poverty alleviation
strategies: Empirical analysis from the upper reach of Minjiang River, China *
Authors * Authors and affiliations * Yiping FangEmail author * Jie Fan *
Maoying Shen * Mengqiang Song Article First Online: 20 November 2012 Received:
05 April 2012 Accepted: 05 September 2012 DOI: 10.1007/s11629-012-2364-z Cite
this article as: Fang, Y., Fan, J., Shen, M. et al. J. Mt. Sci. (2012) 9: 869.
doi:10.1007/s11629-012-2364-z * 1 Citations * 214 Downloads ## Abstract Using
four types of settlements in the upper reach of Minjiang River as case, we
establish structural models in farmers’ income of different settlement
patterns based on rural household panel data to reveal the gradient effect on
farmers’ income and determinants. The results indicate that: (1) except the
resettlement area, the incomes for farmers living in river valley, semi-
mountain, and high-mountain settlements present a decreasing trend with the
elevation increasing; on the contrary, their nonfarm earnings show an
increasing trend with the elevation decreasing; (2) from the effect on
farmers’ income, there is a common feature that the nonfarm earnings and
farming incomes have significant positive effects, and family size and
productive expenditure have significant negative effects. One exception to
this is the productive expenditure, which becomes insignificant in the model
of resettlement area; (3) from the way of increasing farmers’ income and
alleviating poverty, there are great differences for four types of settlements
in mountain areas, however, the improvement of agricultural product sales,
agricultural production subsidies, the expansion for nonfarm employment, and
the control of the family’s size are the most effective approaches for poverty
alleviation. ### Keywords Mountain settlementsRural householdIncome
gradientPoverty Download to read the full article text ### References 1\. Acs
S, Hanley N, Dallimer M, et al. (2010) The effect of decoupling on marginal
agricultural systems: implications for farm incomes, land use and upland
ecology. Land Use Policy 27(2): 550–563.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 2\. Cui YQ, Xu
XY, Bao ZQ, et al. (2011) Impact of production of non-timber forest products
on farmer households’ income. Journal of Zhejiang A&amp;F University
28(1):121–126. (In Chinese)Google Scholar 3\. Cunguara B, Darnhofer I (2011)
Assessing the impact of improved agricultural technologies on household income
in rural Mozambique. Food Policy 36(3): 378–390.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 4\.
Ding SJ, Meriluoto L, Reed WR, Tao DY, Wu HT (2011) The impact of agricultural
technology adoption on income inequality in rural China: evidence from
southern Yunnan Province. China Economic Review 22(3): 344–356.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 5\. Dogliotti S, Rossing WAH, van Ittersum MK (2004) Systematic design
and evaluation of crop rotations enhancing soil conservation, soil fertility
and farm income: a case study for vegetable farms in South Uruguay.
Agricultural Systems 80(3): 277–302.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 6\. Glauben T,
Herzfeld T, Rozelle S, et al. (2012) Persistent Poverty in Rural China: Where,
Why, and How to Escape? World Development 40(4): 784–795.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 7\. Hanjra MA, Ferede T, Gutta DG (2009a) Pathways to breaking the
poverty trap in Ethiopia: Investments in agricultural water, education, and
markets. Agricultural Water Management 96(11): 1596–1604.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 8\. Hanjra MA, Ferede T, Gutta DG (2009b) Reducing poverty in sub-
Saharan Africa through investments in water and other priorities. Agricultural
Water Management 96(7): 1062–1070.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 9\. Hangjra MA,
Gichuki F (2008) Investments in agricultural water management for poverty
reduction in Africa: case studies of Limpopo, Nile, and Volta river basins.
Natural Resources Forum 32(3):185–202.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 10\. Hanjra MA,
Qureshi ME (2010) Global water crisis and future food security in an era of
climate change. Food Policy 35(5): 365–377.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 11\. Hediger
W (2003) Sustainable farm income in the presence of soil erosion: an
agricultural Hartwick rule. Ecological Economics 45(2): 221–236.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 12\. Holden S, Shiferaw B, Pender J (2004) Non-farm income, household
welfare, and sustainable land management in a less-favoured area in the
Ethiopian highlands. Food Policy 29(4): 369–392.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 13\.
Hussain I, Hanjra MA (2003) Does irrigation water matter for rural poverty
alleviation? Evidence from South and South-East Asia. Water Policy 5(5–6):
429–442.Google Scholar 14\. Hussain I, Hanjra MA (2004) Irrigation and poverty
alleviation: Review of the empirical evidence. Irrigation and Drainage 53(1):
1–15.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 15\. Jansen HGP, Rodriguez A, Damon A, Pender J,
Chenier J, Schipper R (2006) Determinants of income-earning strategies and
adoption of conservation practices in hillside communities in rural Honduras.
Agricultural Systems 88(1): 92–110.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 16\. Khan S, Hanjra
MA, Mu JX (2009) Water management and crop production for food security in
China: A review. Agricultural Water Management 96(3): 349–360.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 17\. Li J, Li SZ (2010) The Impact of the program of farmland
conversion for forest land on the income of rural household in Western China:
An empirical evidence from the mountain area of the south part of Zhouzhi
County, Xi’an City. China Land Science 2:57–63. (in Chinese)Google Scholar
18\. Liu XQ, Xu JT, Wang LQ (2011) Empirical analysis on influences of
collective forest tenure reform on farmers’ income. Journal of Beijing
Forestry University (Social Sciences) 10(2):69–75. (In Chinese)Google Scholar
19\. Mittenzwei K, Lien G, Fjellstad W, et al. (2010) Effects of landscape
protection on farm management and farmers’ income in Norway. Journal of
Environmental Management 91(4): 861–868.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 20\. Miyata S,
Minot N, Hu DH (2009) Impact of contract farming on income: linking small
farmers, packers, and supermarkets in China. World Development 37(11):
1781–1790.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 21\. Molden D, Oweis T, Steduto P, et al.
(2010) Improving agricultural water productivity: Between optimism and
caution. Agricultural Water Management 97(4): 528–535.CrossRefGoogle Scholar
22\. Mu JX, Khan S, Hanjra MA, et al. (2009) A food security approach to
analyse irrigation efficiency improvement demands at the country level.
Irrigation and Drainage 58(1): 1–16.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 23\. Namara RE,
Hanjra MA, Castillo GE, et al. (2010) Agricultural water management and
poverty linkages. Agricultural Water Management 97(4): 520–527.CrossRefGoogle
Scholar 24\. Narayanamoorthy A, Hanjra MA (2006) Rural infrastructure and
agricultural output linkages: A study of 256 Indian districts. Indian Journal
of Agricultural Economics 61(3): 444–459.Google Scholar 25\. Narayanamoorthy
A, Hanjra MA (2010) What contributes to disparity in rural-urban poverty in
Tamil Nadu?: A district level analysis. Indian Journal of Agricultural
Economics 65(2): 228–244.Google Scholar 26\. Neupane RP, Thapa GB (2001)
Practices that minimize the rate of soil degradation, improve soil fertility,
increase crop yields and raise farm income are key to sustaining agricultural
productivity in the hills of Nepal. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
84(1):157–167.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 27\. Pokhrel DM, Thapa GB (2007) Are
marketing intermediaries exploiting mountain farmers in Nepal? A study based
on market price, marketing margin and income distribution analyses.
Agricultural Systems 94(2):151–164.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 28\. Ramadhanj T,
Otsyina R, Franzel S (2002) Improving household incomes and reducing
deforestation using rotational woodlots in Tabora district, Tanzania.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 89(3): 229–239.CrossRefGoogle Scholar
29\. Rao EJO, Qaim M (2011) Supermarkets, farm household income, and poverty:
insights from Kenya. World Development 39(5): 784–796.CrossRefGoogle Scholar
30\. Reardon T (1997) Using evidence of household income diversification to
inform study of the rural nonfarm labor market in Africa. World Development
25(5): 735–741.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 31\. Rozelle S, Huang JK, Zhang LX
(1997) Poverty, population and environmental degradation in China. Food Policy
22(3): 229–251.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 32\. Sunderlin WD, Angelsen A,
Resosudarmo DP, et al. (2001) Economics crisis, small farmer well-being, and
forest cover change in Indonesia. World Development 29(5):
767–782.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 33\. Sun MJ, Chen BF, Ding WX, et al. (2010)
Comparative analysis of influence factors for household income before and
after the natural disaster: a study of Wenchuan. Technology Economics 29(5):
88–92, 118. (In Chinese)Google Scholar 34\. Tang Y (2011) A positive study of
the relationship between rural credit and peasant income based on the VAR
Model. Journal of Shihezi University (Philosophy and Social Sciences)
25(4):8–11. (In Chinese)Google Scholar 35\. van den Berga MM, Hengsdijk H,
Wolf J, et al. (2007) The impact of increasing farm size and mechanization on
rural income and rice production in Zhejiang province, China. Agricultural
Systems 94(3): 841–850.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 36\. Wang Y (2010) Income
uncertainty, risk coping mechanism and farmer production &amp; management
decision: an empirical study from Sichuan Province. Agriculture and
Agricultural Science Procedia 1: 230–240.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 37\. Xiao FQ
(2010) Sequence of impact of human capital factor on farmers income-based on
survey data of Guangxi rural areas. Soft Science 24(6):101–105. (In
Chinese)Google Scholar 38\. Yang DT (2004) Education and allocative
efficiency: household income growth during rural reforms in China. Journal of
Development Economics 74(1): 137–162.CrossRefGoogle Scholar 39\. Yang XS, Wu
DD, Lucas GR (2010) Impact of ecological tourism on farmers income structure
and community economy in Daxi Village of Anji County. Ecological Economics 1:
193–197. (In Chinese)Google Scholar 40\. Ye HY (2011) The impact mechanism of
migrant worker on household income based on survey data of 1106 farmers in
Ankang City, Shaanxi Province. Academic Forum 4: 158–163. (In Chinese)Google
Scholar 41\. Zhao LJ, Wang LQ (2011) Impact of follow-up industries of land
conversion from farmland back to forestland on farmers’ income and employment:
taking Pingquan County in Hebei Province as an example. Journal of Beijing
Forestry University (Social Sciences) 10(2): 76–81. (In Chinese)Google Scholar
## Copyright information © Science Press, Institute of Mountain Hazards and
Environment, CAS and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 ## Authors and
Affiliations * Yiping Fang * 1 Email author * Jie Fan * 2 * Maoying Shen * 3 *
Mengqiang Song * 1 1\. 1.Institute of Mountain Hazards and
EnvironmentCASChengduChina 2\. 2.Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural
Resources ResearchCASBeijingChina 3\. 3.Sichuan Academy of Social
SciencesChengduChina ## About this article Print ISSN 1672-6316 Online ISSN
1993-0321 Publisher Name SP Science Press About this journal Reprints and
Permissions ## Article actions ### Export citation * .RIS Papers Reference
Manager RefWorks Zotero * .ENW EndNote * .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley ### Share
article * Email * Facebook * Twitter * LinkedIn * Shareable link ## Article
contents * Article * Abstract * References * Copyright information * Authors
and Affiliations * About this article ## Cookies We use cookies to improve
your experience with our site. More information Accept Over 10 million
scientific documents at your fingertips ### Switch Edition * Academic Edition
* Corporate Edition * Home * Impressum * Legal Information * Contact Us (C)
2016 Springer International Publishing AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged
in GWLA (3000123364) - University of Arizona (8200796902) 150.135.210.141
*[DOI]: Digital Object Identifier

