![IDEAS home](/ideas2.gif) ⌕ Advanced Search * Papers * Journals * Authors *
Institutions * Rankings * Data (FRED®) Advanced Search IDEAS home ### Browse
for material * Working Papers * Journals * Software Components * Books * Book
Chapters * Authors * Institutions * Rankings * Data (FRED®) ### Find material
* JEL Classification * NEP reports * Subscribe to new research * Search * Pub
compilations * Reading lists ### MyIDEAS ### More options are now at bottom of
page IDEAS is a ![RePEc](/RePEc.gif) service hosted by the Research Division
of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis ![IDEAS home](/ideas2.gif) Printed
from https://ideas.repec.org/ Share: MyIDEAS: Log in (now much improved!) to
save this article # Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: an
analysis based on farm size and ecological zone ### Contents: * Author info *
Abstract * Bibliographic info * Download info * Related research * References
* Citations * Lists * Statistics * Corrections ## Author Info * Tadesse,
Bedassa * Krishnamoorthy, S. Registered author(s): * Bedassa Tadesse ##
Abstract Despite the wider application of efficiency analysis in Indian
agriculture, little has been done on the investigation of intra and
interecological variations, size differences and their interactions. However,
ecological issues have paramount implications for the low-input sustainable
agricultural production. Furthermore, due to the various causes of efficiency,
the age-old size-based debate on efficiency differences is not yet resolved.
The present study examines the level of technical efficiency across ecological
zones and farm size groups in paddy farms of the southern Indian state of
Tamil Nadu. The study showed that 90% of the variation in output among paddy
(IR-20) farms ' in the state is due to differences in technical efficiency.
Land, animal power and fertilisers have significant influence on the level of
paddy production. Varying from 0.59 to 0.97, the mean technical efficiency was
found to be 0.83. The use of F-test in two-way analysis of variance (ANOV A)
and censored regression (Tobit model), with dummies for ecological zones, farm
size groups and their interactions, has shown that, at mean level, the level
of technical efficiency among paddy farms of the state differs significantly
across agro-ecological zones and size groups as well. The study further
indicated that small-sized paddy farms in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms
in zone III are represented by ecologically size-biased production techniques;
thus achieving higher technical efficiency. © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. ##
Download Info If you experience problems downloading a file, check if you have
the proper application to view it first. In case of further problems read the
IDEAS help page. Note that these files are **not** on the IDEAS site. Please
be patient as the files may be large. **File URL:** http://purl.umn.edu/174067
**Download Restriction:** no ## Bibliographic Info Article provided by
International Association of Agricultural Economists in its journal
Agricultural Economics of Agricultural Economists. **Volume (Year):** 16
(1997) **Issue (Month):** 3 (August) **Pages:** as HTML HTML with abstract
plain text plain text with abstract BibTeX RIS (EndNote, RefMan, ProCite)
ReDIF JSON in new window **Handle:**| RePEc:ags:iaaeaj:174067 \---|---
**Contact details of provider:**| Web page: http://www.iaae-agecon.org/ Email:
More information through EDIRC ## Related research [Other version(s)
available] **Keywords: ** Productivity Analysis; Research and Development/Tech
Change/Emerging Technologies; **Other versions of this item:** * Tadesse,
Bedassa & Krishnamoorthy, S., 1997. "**Technical efficiency in paddy farms of
Tamil Nadu: An analysis based on farm size and ecological zone**,"
Agricultural Economics, Blackwell, vol. 16(3), pages 185-192, August. ##
References **References listed on IDEAS** Please report citation or reference
errors to , or , if you are the registered author of the cited work, log in to
your RePEc Author Service profile, click on "citations" and make appropriate
adjustments.: as HTML HTML with abstract plain text plain text with abstract
BibTeX RIS (EndNote, RefMan, ProCite) ReDIF JSON in new window 1\. M. Ali & M.
A. Chaudhry, 1990. "**Inter-Regional Farm Efficiency In Pakistan'S Punjab: A
Frontier Production Function Study**," Journal of Agricultural Economics,
Wiley Blackwell, vol. 41(1), pages 62-74. 2\. Lau, Lawrence J & Yotopoulos,
Pan A, 1971. "**A Test for Relative Efficiency and Application to Indian
Agriculture**," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.
61(1), pages 94-109, March. 3\. D. L. Neff & P. Garcia & C. H. Nelson, 1993.
"**Technical Efficiency: A Comparison Of Production Frontier Methods**,"
Journal of Agricultural Economics, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 44(3), pages 479-489.
4\. Battese, George E. & Coelli, Tim J., 1988. "**Prediction of firm-level
technical efficiencies with a generalized frontier production function and
panel data**," Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 38(3), pages 387-399,
July. 5\. Jondrow, James & Knox Lovell, C. A. & Materov, Ivan S. & Schmidt,
Peter, 1982. "**On the estimation of technical inefficiency in the stochastic
frontier production function model**," Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol.
19(2-3), pages 233-238, August. 6\. Aigner, Dennis & Lovell, C. A. Knox &
Schmidt, Peter, 1977. "**Formulation and estimation of stochastic frontier
production function models**," Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 6(1),
pages 21-37, July. 7\. Sidhu, Surjit S, 1974. "**Relative Efficiency in Wheat
Production in the Indian Punjab**," American Economic Review, American
Economic Association, vol. 64(4), pages 742-51, September. 8\. Battese, George
E. & Corra, Greg S., 1977. "**Estimation Of A Production Frontier Model: With
Application To The Pastoral Zone Of Eastern Australia**," Australian Journal
of Agricultural Economics, Australian Agricultural and Resource Economics
Society, vol. 21(03), December. 9\. George E. Battese & Greg S. Corra, 1977.
"**Estimation Of A Production Frontier Model: With Application To The Pastoral
Zone Of Eastern Australia**," Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource
Economics, Australian Agricultural and Resource Economics Society, vol. 21(3),
pages 169-179, December. 10\. Meeusen, Wim & van den Broeck, Julien, 1977.
"**Efficiency Estimation from Cobb-Douglas Production Functions with Composed
Error**," International Economic Review, Department of Economics, University
of Pennsylvania and Osaka University Institute of Social and Economic Research
Association, vol. 18(2), pages 435-44, June. 11\. K. Kalirajan, 1981. "**An
Econometric Analysis of Yield Variability in Paddy Production**," Canadian
Journal of Agricultural Economics/Revue canadienne d'agroeconomie, Canadian
Agricultural Economics Society/Societe canadienne d'agroeconomie, vol. 29(3),
pages 283-294, November. 12\. Faqir S. Bagi, 1981. "**Relationship Between
Farm Size and Economic Efficiency: An Analysis of Farm-Level Data from Haryana
(India)**," Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics/Revue canadienne
d'agroeconomie, Canadian Agricultural Economics Society/Societe canadienne
d'agroeconomie, vol. 29(3), pages 317-326, November. **Full references**
(including those not matched with items on IDEAS) ## Citations Citations are
extracted by the CitEc Project, subscribe to its RSS feed for this item. as
HTML HTML with abstract plain text plain text with abstract BibTeX RIS
(EndNote, RefMan, ProCite) ReDIF JSON in new window **Cited by:** **This item
has more than 25 citations. To prevent cluttering this page, these citations
are listed on a separate page.** ## Lists This item is not listed on
Wikipedia, on a reading list or among the top items on IDEAS. ## Statistics
Access and download statistics ## Corrections When requesting a correction,
please mention this item's handle: RePEc:ags:iaaeaj:174067. See general
information about how to correct material in RePEc. For technical questions
regarding this item, or to correct its authors, title, abstract, bibliographic
or download information, contact: (AgEcon Search) If you have authored this
item and are not yet registered with RePEc, we encourage you to do it here.
This allows to link your profile to this item. It also allows you to accept
potential citations to this item that we are uncertain about. If references
are entirely missing, you can add them using this form. If the full references
list an item that is present in RePEc, but the system did not link to it, you
can help with this form. If you know of missing items citing this one, you can
help us creating those links by adding the relevant references in the same way
as above, for each refering item. If you are a registered author of this item,
you may also want to check the "citations" tab in your profile, as there may
be some citations waiting for confirmation. Please note that corrections may
take a couple of weeks to filter through the various RePEc services. #### More
services #### MyIDEAS Follow series, journals, authors &amp; more #### New
papers by email Subscribe to new additions to RePEc #### Author registration
Public profiles for Economics researchers #### Rankings Various rankings of
research in Economics &amp; related fields #### Genealogy Who was a student of
whom, using RePEc #### RePEc Biblio Curated articles &amp; papers various
economics topics #### MPRA Upload your paper to be listed on RePEc and IDEAS
#### EconAcademics Blog aggregator for economics research #### Plagiarism
Cases of plagiarism in Economics #### Job Market Papers RePEc working paper
series dedicated to the job market #### Fantasy League Pretend you are at the
helm of an economics department #### Services from the StL Fed Data, research,
apps &amp; more from the St. Louis Fed #### About RePEc * RePEc home * FAQ *
Blog * Help! * RePEc team * Participating archives * Privacy * Legal #### How
to help * Corrections * Volunteers * Get papers listed * Open a RePEc archive
* Get RePEc data This information is provided to you by IDEAS at the Research
Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis using RePEc data. Top of
page

