Skip to main content Toggle navigation * * ProQuest * Recent Searches *
Selected Items Display selected items× ## Display selected items Please select
one or more items. Close * My Research and Language Selection *  Sign into My
Research * Exit ProQuest * * English * Help and support * ProQuest Help \\-
this link will open in a new windowGo directly to information on using the
current page. * * Support CenterFind answers to questions about products,
access, use, setup, and administration. * * Training (LibGuides)User guides,
online and onsite training, webinars, and more. * * Contact UsHave a question,
idea, or some feedback? We want to hear from you. * * Product TrialsRequest a
free product trial. * Basic Search * Advanced Search * Publications * Browse *
Databases (41) Sign in Sign in to My Research× ## Sign in to My Research Save
and organize your research. Username: Password: Forgot your password? Create
My Research account Create My Research account Sign in
![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)
![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)
Create a My Research account× ## Create a My Research account **All fields are
required.** Username Used to sign into your account. Password Use 8 or more
letters and numbers. Retype password First name Displays on screen when you
are signed in. Last name Displays in emails sent from your account. Email
address Used for account confirmation, forgotten password reminders, and
alerts. Account Id Account Indentifier ![Refworks
logo](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/pqc/components/images/rw_logo.png) ### The
University of Arizona Library As a member of this institution, you are
eligible for a My Research account connected with RefWorks. After you create
your account you can manage your research in both ProQuest and RefWorks Do you
have a RefWorks Account? (optional) Learn more \\- this link will open in a
new window Yes, I have an existing RefWorks account that I want to link with
My Research. If you have a RefWorks account, save your login details here to
keep your My Research citations and folders synchronized with RefWorks. You
can add these settings later to the RefWorks Settings page, available from the
My Account tab in My Research. Instructions for Athens and Shibboleth users.
Log-in name Password Group code Optional - Enter if your RefWorks account is
provided by a different institution I have read and agree to the privacy
policy and terms and conditions (linked below). * Privacy policy * Terms and
Conditions Create accountCancel
![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)
Forgot your password?× ## Forgot your password? Enter your My Research email
address, and we'll email your username and password. Email address: SendCancel
![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif) ×[[missing key: buttonClose]]
## Select language * العربية * Bahasa Indonesia * Čeština * Deutsch * Español
* Français * 한국어 * Italiano * Magyar * 日本語 * Norsk * Polski * Português
(Brasil) * Português (Portugal) * Русский * ไทย * Türkçe * 中文(简体)‎ * 中文(繁體)‎
Would you like to exit ProQuest or continue working? Tab through to the exit
button or continue working link.Help icon&gt; \\- this link will open in a new
windowExit× ## Exit Exit ProQuest, or continue working? ExitContinue working
**Note:** Items you have selected during your session and your list of recent
searches are not saved unless you have signed into your account and added them
to My Research. Your session is about to expire. Sessions expire after 30
minutes of inactivity. Tab through the options to the continue working button
or end session link. Help icon Close icon \\- this link will open in a new
windowClose iconYour session is about to expire× ## Your session is about to
expire Your session will expire in . Sessions expire after 30 minutes of
inactivity. Continue workingEnd Session **Note:** Items you have selected
during your session and your list of recent searches are not saved unless you
have signed into your account and added them to My Research. * More like this
# Productivity Variation and Water Use in Farms of Madurantakam Tankfed Area
of Chengalpattu District, Tamil Nadu Randhir, O Timothy; Krishnamoorthy, S.
**Indian Journal of Agricultural
Economics**![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)45.1![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif)
(Jan 1, 1990): 56. ![Publisher logo. Links to publisher website, opened in a
new window.](http://pqwebimages.s3.amazonaws.com/pub/1818936.gif)![Publisher
logo. Links to publisher website, opened in a new
window.](http://pqwebimages.s3.amazonaws.com/pub/1818936.gif) 1\. Full text
2\. Full text - PDF 3\. Details Page / 5Go
![](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/core/spacer.gif) ![Single page
spread](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/ctx/images/icons/sglSpread.png)![Double
page spread](/assets/r20161.9.1.366.866/ctx/images/icons/dblSpread.png) Show
image viewer keyboard controls Zoom inZoom outMove leftMove rightMove upMove
downRotate leftRotate rightActual sizeResetFull screen * ![Productivity
Variation and Water Use in Farms of Madurantakam Tankfed Area of Chengalpattu
District, Tamil Nadu Page
1](http://media.proquest.com/media/ch/pao/doc/y521-1990-045-01-000008/page/pg.gif?pg=1&_a=ChgyMDE2MTIwMTA2MDg1NzgzODo1NzM2NTUSBjExMTUwORoKT05FX1NFQVJDSCIPMTUwLjEzNS4yMTAuMTQzKgcxODE4OTM2MgoxMzExMzA4MTY0Og9TaW5nbGVQYWdlSW1hZ2VCATBSBk9ubGluZVoCUEdiBE5PUk1qCjE5OTAvMDEvMDFyAHoAggEpUC0xMDA4NjEyLTgzNjAtUEVSUEVUVUFMLTEwMDAwMTkxLTIxMjMxOTeSAQZPbmxpbmXKARZweXRob24tcmVxdWVzdHMvMi4xMC4w0gESU2Nob2xhcmx5IEpvdXJuYWxzmgIHUHJlUGFpZKoCH09TOkVNUy1QYWdlSW1hZ2UtZ2V0SW1hZ2VTb3VyY2XKAg9GZWF0dXJlfEFydGljbGXiAgFO6gIIZ3NjaG9sYXLyAgA%3D&_s=ONMJ%2BEmcuwo3H3bCVdR55eg1ZGA%3D)
# More like this Search ProQuest...Search button Download PDF Cite Email Print
Save * Save to My Research * Print * * Export/Save * RefWorks * EasyBib * HTML
* JPEG (multiple images in a zip file) * PDF * RIS (works with EndNote,
Citavi, etc.) * RTF (works with Microsoft Word) * Text only * XLS (works with
Microsoft Excel) Choose "Display selected items" to manage your list.
Close OverlayEnd Add to Selected items Save to My Research× ## Save to My
Research Please select one or more items. Close ![Return to the UA
Libraries](http://www.library.arizona.edu/images/libresources/pq-ualogo.gif)
Ask a Librarian * Cited by (3) ##### Related items __Back to top * ![Return to
the UA Libraries](http://www.library.arizona.edu/images/libresources/pq-
ualogo.gif) * Ask a Librarian * Contact Us * Terms and Conditions *
Accessibility * Privacy Policy * Cookie Policy * Credits Copyright © 2016
ProQuest LLC.

