# ![Page Header](http://ci-
journal.net/public/journals/2/pageHeaderTitleImage_en_US.png) Quick Links
Journal Statistics Editorial Team Complete Issue PDFs Submission Process Peer
Review Process Community Informatics Focus and Scope More... Donations
Language English Español (España) User Username | \---|--- Password | Remember
me Article Tools ![abstract](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/abstract.png) Abstract ![print
article](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/printArticle.png) Print this
article ![metadata](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/metadata.png) Indexing metadata
![cite article](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/citeArticle.png) How to cite
item ![editorial policies](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/editorialPolicies.png) Review
policy ![email article](http://ci-
journal.net/plugins/blocks/readingTools/icons/emailArticle.png) Email this
article (Login required) Journal Content Search \--- All Authors Title
Abstract Index terms Full Text Browse * By Issue * By Author * By Title Font
Size Information * For Readers * For Authors * For Librarians Open Journal
Systems Journal Help * Home * About * Log In * Register * Search * Current *
Archives * Announcements * Submit Article * Mailing List * Editorial Board
Home &gt; Vol 11, No 1 (2015) &gt; Muthiah ## Assessment of Mobile Voice
Agricultural Messages Given to Farmers of Cauvery Delta Zone of Tamil Nadu,
India M. Ganesan*1, Jayalakshmi Umadikar2 and Suma Prashant3 1, 2, 3: IIT
Madras' Rural Technology and Business Incubator, IITM Research Park, Taramani
Chennai, India. Corresponding Author (email): ganesanmuthiah2009@gmail.com
*Formerly: Senior Project Officer, IIT Madras' Rural Technology and Business
Incubator ### INTRODUCTION Enhanced farm productivity and farmers' livelihoods
largely depend on how the relevant technology information and farm inputs are
accessed by farmers. Singh (2011) reviewed various delivery mechanisms of
agricultural extension services available to farmers in India. This study
showed that an innovative approach towards farmers was practiced during the
Green Revolution period for disseminating agricultural information to farmers
in India. However, this approach had facilitated only resource rich and
irrigated land holding farmers in utilizing the Government support while small
and marginal farmers were not able to be part of this extension model. In the
earlier practice of extension, farmers were contacted on a one to one basis,
which had been a very effective but an expensive and unsustainable practice.
Another approach was the farmer field school which consisted of schools
without walls where groups of farmers met periodically with facilitators
during the crop season. An important learning from the farmer field schools
was that of sustainability without outside funding sources. Singh further
emphasized that a new approach using Information and Communication Technology
for the dissemination of agricultural information that is relevant and
reliable needs to be developed to achieve a real impact on farm productivity
and livelihoods. According to the National Sample Survey, only 40 per cent of
the farmer households accessed information about agricultural techniques and
inputs (NSS, 2005). Farmers access information from progressive farmers, input
dealers, mass media, public extension workers, cooperatives, output
buyers/processors, Government demonstrations, village fairs, study tours,
Krishi Vigyan Kendras and private companies. But, the most important sources
of information are progressive farmers, input dealers and mass media (Surabhi
and Gaurav, 2009; Surabhi et al. 2010; Ashutosh et al. 2012). , ICT in
different forms has been widely taken up in India by various local or national
non-governmental organizations followed by private and public sector agencies
(Saravanan, 2010), as a tool to disseminate agricultural information amongst
farmers. Mobile application plays a key role in fulfilling the agricultural
information needs of the farmers as it has many advantages such as easy and
convenient access, reach to areas where there is no other ICT infrastructure
like internet, fixed lines etc., and is easily afforded by farmers (Ravinder
and Vister, 2010). According to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, the
number of wireless mobile phone subscribers has reached 867.80 million as on
March 2013 and India is the second largest wireless market in the world (TRAI,
June, 2013). Further, rural subscribers are continuously increasing every
month, as compared to urban subscribers. The increasing trend in mobile phone
use, particularly in remote rural areas, provides an opportunity to bridge the
rural and urban digital divide. Several mobile phone based agricultural
extension projects have been deployed in India like, aAqua (Krithi et al.
2011), Avaaj Otalo, (Patel et al. 2010), mobile digital video (Rikin et al.
2009). Similarly, IFFCO Kisan Sanchar Limited (IKSL), BSNL, Reuters Market
Light (RML), Nokia Life Tools, Fisher Friend Project, Rubber Board and
Department of Agriculture, Haryana State provide services through SMS and
Voice messages containing agriculture related information like market price,
weather updates, news on agricultural policies and best agricultural practices
(ICTFSECBP, 2009; Fafchamps &amp; Minten, 2012; Saravanan, 2010). The
Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil Nadu, in collaboration with
IITM's RTBI has been disseminating agricultural information to farming
communities of five delta districts, through voice messages delivered on
farmers' mobiles. For the farmer, the costs of the service are zero, as the
messages, delivered as incoming voice calls, are free for farmers. ###
Dissemination process of mobile voice messages on Agricultural Information
Figure 1 presents the dissemination process of mobile based voice messages
containing agricultural information. The agricultural extension officials of
the Department of Agriculture, in the state are responsible for preparing the
content of agricultural information, while Uniphore Software Systems (the
technology partner in this initiative and a company incubated by RTBI) is
responsible for developing and dissemination of agricultural information to
farmers' mobile number through voice messages. Information was sent on a
monthly basis and the message duration lasted for a maximum of one minute. The
messages were relayed during August, 2012 to July, 2013. From the call
records, it was found that a total of 3,833,650 voice messages with an average
of three to four messages per month per farmer were delivered to 123756
farmers- the messages contained agricultural information covering various
aspects such as fertilizer application, pesticide application, best
agricultural practices, seed varieties, insurance and government schemes. The
analysis of the voice messages revealed that a large percentage of messages
were on Government schemes (29.53%) followed by best agricultural practices
(23.36%) and fertilizer application (23.36%). Table 1 presents the category of
information disseminated through mobile voice messages to the farmers. Table
1: Category of agricultural information delivered through mobile voice
messages ![table1](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6995) ![figure1](http
://ci-journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6993) Figure 1:
Dissemination process of mobile voice messages on agricultural information The
present study mainly focuses on the assessment of mobile voice message
(containing agricultural advisory information) service given to farmers in
five delta districts of Tamil Nadu. The specific objectives are: 1\. To
describe the socio economic characteristics of the farmers in the study area
2\. To find out the sources of agricultural information which farmers are
accessing 3\. To find out the adoption level of agricultural information
disseminated through mobile voice messages 4\. To examine the usefulness and
trustworthiness of agricultural information disseminated through mobile voice
messages 5\. To examine the level of satisfaction of farmers with the mobile
voice messages in terms of audio quality, content and language of messages 6\.
To determine the relationship between the socio economic characteristics of
the farmers and adoption of agricultural information delivered through mobile
voice messages The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows:
Section 2 describes the methodology in which we outline the study area,
sampling procedure &amp; sample size, data collection &amp; variable
measurement as also data analysis and section 3 presents the results and
discussion. Section 4 covers the conclusion and recommendations for further
research. ### METHODOLOGY ### The Study Area The study was carried out in five
districts of Cauvery Delta zone namely Thanjavur, Thiruvarur, Nagapattinam,
Cuddalore and Tiruchirapalli of Tamil Nadu, India (Figure 2). The study area
lies in Cauvery delta agro climatic zone. It lies in the eastern part of Tamil
Nadu between 10º-11º30' North latitude and between 78º15' - 79 º 45'
longitudes. The total geographic land area of Cauvery delta zone is 14.47 lakh
ha, which is equivalent to 11.13 per cent of the Tamil Nadu geographical area.
This area experiences an average annual rainfall (mean) of 1078 mm and most of
the rainfall is received during the North East monsoon season. Rice is the
principal crop being grown here and the next important crops are pulses such
as black gram and green gram, being grown as rice fallow crops. Vegetables
like brinjal, chillies and greens are also being grown in a limited area in
the well-drained fertile lands, depending upon the underground water source.
In light clay loamy soils under garden land condition crops like groundnut,
maize, gingelly and irrigated pulses are grown. Banana, sugarcane and
ornamentals like jasmine, rose, chrysanthemum, crossandra and nerium are the
annuals being grown. Coconut gardens, bamboo and wood lots are found scattered
in the delta in different densities. Mangoes, Jackfruits, citrus of various
kinds - guava, pomegranate and custard apple etc., are also being grown in
specific pockets. ![figure2](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6994) Figure 2 Map
showing the study areas ### Sampling Procedures and Sampling Size All the five
districts of Cauvery delta region were selected for the study because all the
registered farmers in these districts receive and participate in the mobile
based voice messages initiative. The districts are Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Tiruchirappalli, Thiruvarur and Cuddalore. This is followed by a convenient
sampling of 40 farmers from each of the districts, forming a sample size of
two hundred (200) farmers, for the study. ### Data Collection and Variable
Measurement The primary data for the study was collected from the farmers
through telephonic interview using a well-structured questionnaire, while the
secondary data was obtained from journals, conference proceedings, internet
etc. The farmers considered were those who had already registered their mobile
number at http://www.tnagrisnet.tn.gov.in/website/index.php run by the State
Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil Nadu. The registered mobile
numbers of the farmers were collected from the technology partner (Uniphore
Software Systems, Chennai). The socio-economic characteristics of the
respondents such as gender, age in completed years, education attainment in
the form of primary school, middle school, high school, higher secondary
school, graduate and post graduate, land holding size classified as marginal
farmer (those who have &lt;2.50 acres), small farmer( those who have 2.51 - 5
acres), medium farmer (those who have 5.01 - 12.50 acres) and large farmer
(those who have 12.51 acres and above) as well as individual farming
experience of the respondents were collected. The farmers were requested to
inform about current sources from where they get agricultural information.
This question was asked to compare the sources of information with the
delivery of agricultural information via mobile phone through voice messages.
Following this, the farmers were asked whether they adopted any of the
information that was delivered through mobile voice messages. The farmers'
perception of usefulness of voice messages was also captured (all of the
messages were useful, most of the messages, few of the messages, and none of
the messages were useful). Level of satisfaction over mobile based voice
messages with regard to audio quality, simplicity of language and content of
the voice messages was measured (Very satisfied, satisfied and not satisfied)
and finally they were asked to answer whether the information that they
received through their mobile phone were same or better than that of the
current sources of information which they were accessing. ### Data Analysis
Data collected for the study were analyzed with the use of simple descriptive
analysis (frequency and percentages) and inferential statistic (Chi-square)
using SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Sciences). ### RESULTS AND
DISCUSSIONS ### Socio-economic characteristics of the farmers Analysis of the
farmers' socio-economic characteristics was carried out and the summary of the
result is presented in Table 2. Majority (91%) of the farmers were male while
only few (9%) of the farmers were female. The higher proportion of male
farmers could be due to the fact that most male farmers were primarily
responsible for doing farming while females were assisting the males in most
of the farming activities apart from doing other work such as manual
transplanting, weeding and attending to value addition activities for their
agricultural commodities. This might be because of the gender division of
labour based on their cultural background as well as prevailing norms and
values of the people living in the study area. This finding is in agreement
with the report of Xiaolan and Shaheen (2012) who stated that the farming
occupation was usually dominated by males though they were assisted by their
female counterparts. The data on age of the farmers shows that 44.00 per cent
of the farmers were 46 years and above, 37.00 per cent of them fell within the
age group of 36 - 45 years and finally 19.00 per cent of the farmers were
below 35 years. This finding implies that most of the respondents were within
the active age group of 45 years and below. Age factor was found to be
significant in agricultural information accessibility and utilization (Meera
et al. 2004). The analysis of education of the farmers shows that most
(43.50%) of the farmers had studied high school and 27.50 per cent of them had
gone up to graduation and 13.00 per cent, 9.00 per cent and 5.50 per cent of
the farmers had middle school education, higher secondary school education and
primary school education, respectively. Two of them had studied up to post
graduation and one had obtained a doctorate degree. Education is one of the
important social factors that improve the attitude towards accessing
agricultural information and their adaptation. The effect of education on
adoption has been argued by several researchers. For instance, in separate
studies, it was reported that education of the respondents was found to have
significant relationship with their ability and interest to access
agricultural information and its adoption (Ango et al. 2013; Rehman, 2013; Ani
et al. 2004; Okwu and Umoru, 2009). The landholding size distribution shows
that 62.00 per cent of the farmers belonged to the marginal and small
categories while the remaining 38.00 per cent were medium and large farmers.
Those farmers with land holdings less than five acres constituted the highest
proportion of the farmers. This indicated that the farmers in India are
generally small and marginal farmers (Surabhi and Gaurav, 2009; Surabhi et al.
2009). The years of individual farming experience show that 54.00 per cent of
the farmers had been involving in farming activities for 11 to 30 years, while
27.00 per cent had farm experience of more than 31 years . This clearly
suggests that farmers have got enough experience in cultivating and managing
their agricultural crops. Table 2: Distribution of the farmers based on socio-
economic characteristics (n=200) ![table2](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6996) ### Sources of
Agricultural Information Table 3 has been furnished with data on agricultural
information sources used by the farmers and the data reveals that majority
(93%) of the farmers relied mostly on agricultural extension officers for
obtaining agricultural information followed by television/radio (75.50%),
friends &amp; family (68.50%), newspaper/magazine (60%), farm supply vendors
(55.50%), local farmer organizations (43.00%) and on their own experience
(36%). With respect to getting information from agricultural extension
officers, the result of the present study is contradictory to Singh et al.
(2009) who found that extension officers were not regarded as a major source
for getting information frequently. Several authors had reported that the most
common source of information used by the farmers were progressive farmers
followed by input dealers (Nitin, 2012; Ashutosh et al. 2012; Surabhi et al.
2009; Glendenning et al. 2010). Progressive farmers still act as an important
source of information in India. Table 3: Distribution of farmers according to
source of agricultural information (n=200) ![table3](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6997) ### Adoption of
agricultural information delivered to farmers' mobile phone The main purpose
of delivering information through mobile phone was to make farmers aware of
the usefulness of modern crop management practices in enhancing a crop's
productivity and subsequently to convince the farmers to adopt the
technologies communicated. As indicated in Table 4, majority (54.00%) of the
farmers did adopt the information disseminated through their mobile phone
while 4.00 per cent of the farmers had not yet adopted the information, but
they were certainly intending to adopt the information obtained through mobile
voice messages in future, once they had sufficient confidence in the messages
received. However, 42.00 per cent of the farmers mentioned that they were not
interested in using the information in the near future as the information was
irrelevant to them. On the other hand, the reasons for successful adoption of
the information by some of the farmers might be due to the fact that these
farmers got the relevant agricultural information at the right time. Getting
reliable, relevant information in time was important for farmers for farm
decision making as reported by Glendenning et al. (2010). Table 4:
Distribution of the farmers according to adoption of agricultural information
delivered via mobile phone (n=200) ![table4](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6998) ### Usefulness of
mobile voice messages The mobile voice messages delivered to registered
farmers contained agricultural information covering different aspects of
fertilizer application, pesticide application, pest management, disease
management, best agricultural practices, seed varieties, seed treatment,
weeding and government schemes. The information was sent on a monthly basis
and the message lasted for a maximum period of one minute. The messages had
been relayed for about ten months with 10 - 15 messages being delivered on an
average to each farmer. In order to understand the usefulness of voice
messages, the farmers were asked how many messages they found useful in their
daily farming practices. The findings are given in Table 5 and the results
showed that 52.00 per cent of the farmers had expressed that either all or
most of the agricultural information was useful, while 14.50 per cent of them
expressed that information contained in half the number of messages was useful
and 18.00 per cent of the farmers said that only few messages were useful.
Only 15.50 per cent of the farmers indicated that none of the voice messages
were useful to them. This might have been due to the information not being
relayed to the farmers at the right stage of the crop or the information not
being relevant to the crops they were growing. Table 5: Distribution of the
farmers based on perception of usefulness of voice messages (n=200)
![table5](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/6999) ###
Trustworthiness of mobile voice messages With regard to trustworthiness of the
voice messages, the data from Table 6 reveals that 92.50 per cent of the
farmers felt the information received could be trusted, while only 7.50 per
cent of them felt otherwise. Patel et al. (2010) who conducted a field study
of Interactive Voice Forum among the small farmers in rural India reported
that farmers preferred to obtain information from known and trusted experts
rather than from other farmers. This confirmed that the information source is
certainly important for farmers to take farm decisions. Similarly, Surabhi and
Gaurav (2009) stated that although mobile phone can help in disseminating
agricultural information to improve the farm productivity and rural incomes,
trustworthiness of information is one of the important aspects that need to be
considered while delivering to farmers to meet their needs and expectations.
Table 6 Distribution of the farmers based on the trust worthiness of voice
messages (n=200) ![table6](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/7000) ### Farmers'
satisfaction with mobile voice messages With reference to satisfaction level
of farmers, the data from Table 7 indicated that almost all the farmers (100%)
were very satisfied with the audio quality, simplicity of language and content
of the voice messages. It implied that the agricultural information that was
disseminated through mobile voice messages could be easily comprehended by
farmers. Agwu et al. (2008) had carried out a study on adoption of improved
agricultural technologies disseminated through radio farmer programme in
Nigeria and stated that the level of satisfaction of individual farmer will
largely inhibit their utilization of this source of information. With respect
to comparison of mobile voice messages with other sources of information, the
data from Table 8 indicated that majority (62.50%) of the farmers did express
that the mobile voice messages were better as compared to other sources of
information that they were accessing. Table 7: Distribution of the farmers
based on the level of satisfaction with mobile based voice messages (n=210)
![table7](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/7001) Table 8:
Distribution of the farmers based on the usefulness of voice messages when
compared to other sources of agricultural information (n=200) ![table8
](http://ci- journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/7002) ###
Relationship between socio economic characteristic of the farmers and their
adoption of agricultural information disseminated through mobile voice
messages (Table 9) Farmer's decision on whether or not to adopt agricultural
information relayed to them is an important variable that could determine the
usefulness of the mobile voice messages. The socio economic characteristics
like gender, age, education, land holding and farming experience may influence
this decision either positively or negatively. The farmers were divided into
three categories (farmers who have adopted the agricultural information,
farmers who have not yet adopted but certainly intend to and farmers who do
not intend to) for doing our analysis. The Chi square analysis was carried out
on this data and the results show that all the socio economic characteristics
of the farmers had no significant relationship with the adoption of
information. There was no significant relationship between gender of the
farmers and adoption of agricultural information disseminated through mobile
voice messages. Similarly, age of the farmers had a non-significant
relationship with adoption of agricultural information. This indicates that
irrespective of age group (older or younger) and gender (male or female)
farmers accept the agricultural information. Also education of the farmers had
a non-significant relationship with the adoption of information. This could
be, because, all the farmers were educated to some extent. Landholding size of
the farmers had a non-significant relationship with the adoption of
information. This implied that regardless of the land holding size the
decision to adopt the agricultural information was uniform. Farming experience
of the farmers also had a non-significant influence on adoption of the
agricultural information. The non-significant relationships in the present
study indicated that adoption of agricultural information was unlikely to be
influenced by any of the socio economic characteristics of the farmers
studied. The findings are in line with Ani et al. (2004) who reported that age
and farming experience of rural women farmers in Nigeria were not found to
have any significant relationship with adoption of farm technologies. However,
education was found to have significant relationship with adoption of
information. Mamudu et al. (2012) reported that farm size, age and education
of the farmers significantly influenced the adoption of modern agricultural
production technologies in Ghana. Similarly, Agwu et al. (2008) indicated that
age and farming experience had significant influence on adoption of improved
agricultural technologies disseminated through radio in Nigeria. Table 9:
Relationship between socio economic characteristics of the farmers and their
adoption of agricultural information disseminated through mobile voice
messages ![table9](http://ci-
journal.net/index.php/ciej/article/viewFile/1067/1133/7003) ### CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS Based on the findings of the study, it could be concluded that
mobile voice messages are an effective communication channel for disseminating
agricultural production technology information to the farmers. The findings
revealed that the majority of the farmers who listened to the agricultural
information delivered through mobile voice messages were male and were within
the active productive ages of 36 to 45 years. All the farmers were found to
have received some form of education. It was also found that the majority of
the farmers had adopted agricultural information received through mobile voice
messages. It was observed that almost all the farmers were very satisfied with
the mobile voice messages as they had effective audio quality and
comprehendible content of agricultural information. Further, the language used
to relay the information in the voice message was very simple and easy to
understand by the farmers. Majority of the farmers were of the opinion that
the agricultural information received on their mobiles was better than other
sources of information they were accessing otherwise. Based on the Chi-square
analysis, it was observed that the socio-economic characteristics of the
farmers had no significant influence on the adoption of agricultural
information disseminated through mobile voice messages. It indicates that
irrespective of the socio- economic characteristics of the farmers, they were
willing to accept agricultural information disseminated through mobile voice
messages. On the basis of the findings in this study, it is recommended that
there should be a further research on the impact of mobile based voice
messages on agriculture being practiced across the delta region, particularly
for small farmers. The information can be collected through focus group
discussions and individual interviews with farmers at the village level. The
objective of this study should be to seek answers to: Are the mobile based
voice messages providing a more effective way of fulfilling farmers'
information needs for timely, relevant and reliable information? Are farmers
benefitting from yield improvements as a result of adopting recommended
practices such as new varieties, best cultivation practices, pesticide
applications, fertilizer applications, etc., received through these mobile
voice messages? The answers to these questions will have important
implications for the department of agriculture in state and central
governments, agricultural information service providers and policy makers. ###
REFERENCES Agwu, A.E., Ekwueme, J.N. and Anyanwu, A.C. (2008). Adoption of
improved agricultural technologies disseminated via radio farmer programme by
farmers in Enugu State, Nigeria. African Journal of Biotechnology, 7 (9),
1277-1286. Ango, A.K., Illo, A.I, Abdullahi, A.N., Maikasuwa, M.A. and Amina,
A. (2013). Role of Farm Radio Agricultural Programmes in Disseminating
Agricultural Technology to Rural Famers for Agricultural Development in Zaria,
Kaduna State, Nigeria. Asian Journal of Agricultural Extension, Economics
&amp; Sociology, 2(1), 54-68. Ani, A.O., Ogunnika, O. and Ifah, S.S. (2004).
Relationship between Socio- Economic Characteristics of Rural Women Farmers
and Their Adoption of Farm Technologies in Southern Ebonyi State, Nigeria.
International Journal of Agriculture &amp; Biology, 06(5), 802-805. Ashutosh
Das, Debabrata Basu and Rupak Goswami. (2012). Accessing Agricultural
Information through Mobile Phone: Lessons of IKSL Services in West Bengal.
Indian Research Journal of Extension Education, 12 (3), 102-107. Fafchamps
Marcel and Minten Bart. (2012). Impact of SMS-Based Agricultural Information
on Indian Farmers, The World Bank Economic Review. Published by Oxford
University Press on behalf of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, 1-32. Glendenning, C.J., Suresh Babu and Kwadwo Asenso Okyere.
(2010). Review of Agricultural Extension in India, Are Farmers' Information
Needs Being Met? IFPRI Discussion Paper 01048. Retrieved August 1, 2013 from
http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp01048.pdf
ICTFSECBP (Information Communication Technology For Small Enterprise Capacity
Building Program). (2009). Final Report September 29, 2006 - September 28,
2009, USAID from the American People Krithi Ramamritham, Chaitra Bahuman and
Anil Bahuman. (2011). aAQUA: ICT- enabled Knowledge Services to Farmers in
India, Success Stories on ICT/ICM in AR4D in Asia and the Pacific Region,
(eds) Malcolm Hazelman, S. Attaluri, Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural
Research Institutions Bangkok, Thailand. Mamudu Abunga Akudugu, Emelia Guo and
Samuel Kwesi Dadzie. (2012). Adoption of Modern Agricultural Production
Technologies by Farm Households in Ghana: What Factors Influence their
Decisions?. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 2(3). Meera, S.
N., Jhamtani, A. and Rao, D.U.M. (2004). Information and communication
technology in agricultural development: a comparative analysis of three
projects from India. Agricultural Research and Extension Network, Network
Paper No.135. Nitin Bhagachand Bachhav. (2012). Information Needs of the Rural
Farmers: A Study from Maharashtra, India: A Survey. Library Philosophy and
Practice (e-journal). NSS. (2005). Situation Assessment Survey of Farmers.
National Sample Survey organization (June, 2005), GoI. Okwu O.J. and Umoru,
B.I. (2009). A study of women farmers' agricultural information needs and
accessibility: A case study of Apa Local Government Area of Benue State,
Nigeria. African Journal of Agricultural Research, 4 (12), 1404-1409. Patel,
N., Chittamuru, D., Jain, A., Dave, P., Parikh, T.P. (2010). Avaaj Otalo - A
Field Study of an In-teractive Voice Forum for Small Farmers in Rural India.
In Proc. CHI 2010, 733-742. Ravinder Kaur Dhaliwal and Vister Joshi. (2010).
Mobile Phones - Boon to Rural Social System. Literacy Information and Computer
Education Journal, 1(4). Rehman, F., Muhammad, S., Ashraf, I., Mahmood Ch.,
K., Ruby, T. and Bibi, I. (2013). Effect of farmers' socioeconomic
characteristics on access to Agricultural information: empirical evidence from
Pakistan. The Journal of Animal &amp; Plant Sciences, 23(1), 324-329. Rikin
Gandhi, Rajesh Veeraraghavan and Kentaro Toyama and Vanaja Ramprasad. (2009).
Digital Green: Participatory Video and Mediated Instruction for Agricultural
Extension, USC Annenberg School for Communication. Published under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license. 5(1),
1-15. Saravanan, R. (2010). India, In: Saravanan (Ed.) ICTs for Agricultural
Extension: Global Experiments, Innovations and Experiences. New India
Publishing Agency (NIPA), New Delhi, 115-168. Singh, D.K., Singh, A.K., Yadav,
V.P., Singh, R.B., Baghel, R.S and Mayank Singh. (2009). Association of Socio-
economic Status with Economic Motivation of the Farmers. Indian Research
Journal of Extension Education, 9 (2 ). Singh, R.P. (2011). Delivery Mechanism
of Agricultural Extension Services to Farmer in India: An Overview. Indian
Research Journal of Extension Education, 11 (1). Surabhi Mittal and Gaurav
Tripathi. (2009). Role of Mobile Phone Technology in Improving Small Farm
Productivity. Agricultural Economics Research Review, 22 (Conference Number),
451-459. Surabhi Mittal, Sanjay Gandhi and Gaurav Tripathi. (2009). Impact On
Small Farmers and Fishermen Through Use Of Mobiles in India. 111 EAAE-IAAE
Seminar 'Small Farms: decline or persistence' University of Kent, Canterbury,
UK, 26th-27th June 2009. Surabhi Mittal, Sanjay Gandhi and Gaurav Tripathi.
(2010). Socio-Economic Impact of Mobile Phones on Indian Agriculture. Working
Paper No. 246. TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India). (2013, March).
Retrieved June 25, 2013 from http://www.trai.gov.in/ Xiaolan Fu and Shaheen
Akter. (2012). Impact of Mobile Telephone on the Quality and Speed of
Agricultural Extension Services Delivery: Evidence from the Rural e-services
Project in India. International Association of Agricultural Economists (IAAE)
2012 Triennial Conference, Foz do Iguaçu, Brazil 18- 24 August 2012.
![Bookmark and Share](http://s7.addthis.com/static/btn/lg-share-en.gif) The
Journal of Community Informatics. ISSN: 1712-4441

