Skip to content * Journals * Books Advanced search * Shopping cart * __ Sign
in * Help ScienceDirect * Journals * Books * Register * Sign in ### Sign in
using your ScienceDirect credentials Username Password Remember me Forgotten
username or password? ### Sign in via your institution * OpenAthens login *
Other institution login * Help * Journals * Books * Register * Sign in * Help
close ### Sign in using your ScienceDirect credentials Username Password
Remember me Forgotten username or password? ### Sign in via your institution *
OpenAthens login * Other institution login __ Export __ You have selected 1
citation for export. Help ### Direct export Save to Mendeley Save to RefWorks
### Export file #### Format RIS (for EndNote, ReferenceManager, ProCite)
BibTeX Text #### Content Citation Only Citation and Abstract Export Advanced
search Close This document does not have an outline. JavaScript is disabled on
your browser. Please enable JavaScript to use all the features on this page.
Agricultural Economics Volume 16, Issue 3, August 1997, Pages 185-192 ![Cover
image](http://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/S01695150.gif) # Technical
efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: An analysis based on farm size and
ecological zone Author links open the overlay panel. Numbers correspond to the
affiliation list which can be exposed by using the show more link. Opens
overlay Bedassa Tadesse ∗, a, JCA.NCIC@PADIS.GN.APC.ORG, Opens overlay S.
Krishnamoorthy b aDepartment of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Jimma
College of Agriculture, P.O. Box 307, Jimma, Ethiopia, IndiabDepartment of
Agricultural Economics, Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development Studies,
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore - 641003, India Accepted 18
March 1997, Available online 23 December 1997 Show more ### Choose an option
to locate/access this article: Check if you have access through your login
credentials or your institution. Check access ![Get Full Text
Elsewhere](http://www.sciencedirect.com/scidirimg/gw_rtn_ihub.gif) ## Sign in
using your ScienceDirect credentials Username: Password: Remember me Not
Registered? Forgotten username or password? OpenAthens login ### Login via
your institution Other institution login doi:10.1016/S0169-5150(97)00004-2 Get
rights and content * * * ## Abstract Despite the wider application of
efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture, little has been done on the
investigation of intra and interecological variations, size differences and
their interactions. However, ecological issues have paramount implications for
the low-input sustainable agricultural production. Furthermore, due to the
various causes of efficiency, the age-old size-based debate on efficiency
differences is not yet resolved. The present study examines the level of
technical efficiency across ecological zones and farm size groups in paddy
farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The study showed that 90% of
the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms in the state is due to
differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power and fertilisers have
significant influence on the level of paddy production. Varying from 0.59 to
0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83. The use of _F_-test
in two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored regression (Tobit model),
with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups and their interactions,
has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical efficiency among paddy
farms of the state differs significantly across agro- ecological zones and
size groups as well. The study further indicated that small-sized paddy farms
in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III are represented by
ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus achieving higher
technical efficiency. * * * open in overlay Corresponding author. Tel.:
002517110102, Fax: 002517110575 Copyright © 1997 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Elsevier About ScienceDirectRemote accessShopping cartContact and supportTerms
and conditionsPrivacy policy Cookies are used by this site. For more
information, visit the cookies page. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. or its
licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of
Elsevier B.V. RELX Group Close overlay Close ## Sign in using your
ScienceDirect credentials Username: Password: Remember me Not Registered?
Forgotten username or password? OpenAthens login ### Login via your
institution Other institution login # Other users also viewed these articles
![](http://cdn.els-cdn.com/sd/sci_dir/closeButton.png) ![Please wait
...](//sdfestaticassets-us-
east-1.sciencedirectassets.com/prod/912746d57a8e7842c2cb66685460adb79ce16adf/images/loader.gif)
Do not show again

