![FAO_logo](/agris-search/search/img/FAO-
logo.svg;jsessionid=ED531CB4F9F163F6779D1D765C633E69) ![home-icon](/agris-
search/search/img/home- icon.svg;jsessionid=ED531CB4F9F163F6779D1D765C633E69)
* English * Español * Français * العربية * 中文 * Русский ![home-icon](/agris-
search/search/img/home- icon.svg;jsessionid=ED531CB4F9F163F6779D1D765C633E69)
Toggle navigation __ AGRIS Register Sign in * My Profile * Change Password *
Searching History * Browsing History * Saved Publications * Logout Search __ *
Register * Sign in ### Related information in other data sources __ __
Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu: an analysis based on farm
size and ecological zone ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) # Technical efficiency in paddy farms of
Tamil Nadu: an analysis based on farm size and ecological zone [1997] ##
Tadesse, B. Krishnamoorthy, S. Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil
Nadu: an analysis based on farm size and ecological zone 1997 Despite the
wider application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture, little has
been done on the investigation of intra and interecological variations, size
differences and their interactions. However, ecological issues have paramount
implications for the low-input sustainable agricultural production.
Furthermore, due to the various causes of efficiency, the age-old size-based
debate on efficiency differences is not yet resolved. The present study
examines the level of technical efficiency across ecological zones and farm
size groups in paddy farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The
study showed that 90% of the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms in
the state is due to differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power
and fertilisers have significant influence on the level of paddy production.
Varying from 0.59 to 0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83.
The use of F-test in two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored
regression (Tobit model), with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups
and their interactions, has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical
efficiency among paddy farms of the state differs significantly across agro-
ecological zones and size groups as well. The study further indicated that
small-sized paddy farms in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III
are represented by ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus
achieving higher technical efficiency. [farm inputs, crop production,
agricultural regions, efficiency, ecology, factors of production, econometric
models, least squares, maximum likelihood, rice, environmental protection,
farm size] [Agricultural economics : the journal of the International
Association of Agricultural Economists] ** Abstract ** Despite the wider
application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture, little has been done
on the investigation of intra and interecological variations, size differences
and their interactions. However, ecological issues have paramount implications
for the low-input sustainable agricultural production. Furthermore, due to the
various causes of efficiency, the age-old size-based debate on efficiency
differences is not yet resolved. The present study examines the level of
technical efficiency across ecological zones and farm size groups in paddy
farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The study showed that 90% of
the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms in the state is due to
differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power and fertilisers have
significant influence on the level of paddy production. Varying from 0.59 to
0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83. The use of F-test in
two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and censored regression (Tobit model),
with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups and their interactions,
has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical efficiency among paddy
farms of the state differs significantly across agro- ecological zones and
size groups as well. The study further indicated that small-sized paddy farms
in zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III are represented by
ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus achieving higher
technical efficiency. ![RDF/XML representation of the
article](search/img/rdf_button.png) ![LodLive provides a demonstration of the
use of Linked Data standards to browse RDF
resources](search/img/lodliveLogo.png) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
Other subjects __ * farm inputs * crop production * agricultural regions *
efficiency * ecology * factors of production * econometric models * least
squares * maximum likelihood * rice * environmental protection * farm size __
![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif) ![Loading...](search/img/loading.gif)
Other information __ _ Language _: English _ Type _: Journal Article _ In
AGRIS since _: 2013 _ Volume _: 16 _ Issue _: 3 _ Start Page _: 185 _ End Page
_: 192 ** All titles **: " Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu:
an analysis based on farm size and ecological zone " __ Save item as: * __
AGRIS_AP * __ RIS * __ EndNote(XML) * __ RDF/XML Translate with ![google-
logo](search/img/google-logo.svg) translator This translation tool is powered
by Google. FAO is not responsible for the accuracy of translations. × #### __
Congratulations Publications saved Close View all **AGRIS:** International
Information System for the Agricultural Science and Technology About Toggle
Dropdown * What is AGRIS * How it works * For contributors * Acceptable use
policy Feedback ![ciard](search/img/ciard.png)
![aginfra](search/img/aginfra.png) #### FAO Departments and Offices * Contact
us * Terms and Conditions * Scam Alert * Report fraud * Employment *
Procurement * Governing Bodies * Office of the Inspector General * Evaluation
* Legal and Ethics Office * Agriculture and Consumer Protection * Economic and
Social Development * Fisheries and Aquaculture * Forestry * Technical
Cooperation * Regional Office for Africa * Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific * Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia * Regional Office for
Latin America and the Caribbean * Regional Office for the Near East and North
Africa * Country Offices Contacts * Contact us * Terms and Conditions * Scam
Alert * Report fraud Utilities * Employment * Procurement * Governing Bodies *
Office of the Inspector General * Evaluation * Legal and Ethics Office
Departments * Agriculture and Consumer Protection * Economic and Social
Development * Fisheries and Aquaculture * Forestry * Technical Cooperation
Offices * Regional Office for Africa * Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific * Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia * Regional Office for
Latin America and the Caribbean * Regional Office for the Near East and North
Africa * Country Offices #### Follow us on *
![facebook](search/img/RTEmagicC_facebook_26.png.png) *
![flickr](search/img/RTEmagicC_flickr_23.png.png) *
![Google+](search/img/RTEmagicC_c6270bed47.png.png) *
![Instagram](search/img/RTEmagicC_456950478f.png.png) *
![LinkedIn](search/img/RTEmagicC_linkedin_07.png.png) * ![RSS news
feeds](search/img/RTEmagicC_rss_19.png.png) *
![SlideShare](search/img/RTEmagicC_433b8859a8.png.png) *
![SoundCloud](search/img/RTEmagicC_2e22811972.png.png) *
![Twitter](search/img/RTEmagicC_twitter_01.png.png) *
![YouTube](search/img/RTEmagicC_youtube_40.png.png) #### Download our App
![](search/img/download-app-icon-55x81px.png) * ![](search/img/applestore-
icon-127x38px.png) * ![](search/img/googleplay-icon-127x38px.png) (C) FAO,
2016

