![logo](/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/02/Logo_CSISA.png) * Home * About
CSISA * Overview * CSISA locations * Partners * CSISA Leadership * Our work *
Bangladesh * India * Nepal * Resources * Annual Reports * Research Notes *
Discussions Papers and Journal Articles * Factsheets and Manuals * Data *
Newsroom * News * Brochures * Newsletters * Photos * Videos * Contact us
Home**Tamil Nadu** # Posts Tagged 'Tamil Nadu' # Farmers in Tamil Nadu Benefit
from Better Information, Tools and Technology Posted on India-news, News -
Homepage, News &amp; Announcements, Uncategorized, October 9, 2015 ![TN exit
workshop](http://csisa.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2015/10/TN- exit-
workshop.jpg)In the last five years, CSISA has reached over 25,000 farmers and
has covered more than 70,000 acres through water- and labor-saving
agricultural technologies in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, as reported
during the CSISA Tamil Nadu Hub Celebration Workshop from 15-16 September in
Thanjavur (participants of the workshop pictured above). As part of CSISA, the
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) tested and scaled-out improved
rice crop technologies and management practices including laser land leveling,
mechanized dry direct seeding of rice, mechanical transplanting of rice, site-
specific nutrient management and line sowing using a multicrop seeder under
reduced-tillage conditions. These technologies are helping farmers reduce the
cost of production and increase their income in Thanjavur, Thiruvarur and
Nagapattinam districts of the Cauvery Delta and the neighboring districts of
Ramanathapuram and Sivagangai. “Farmers can save water by 25–35 percent by not
puddling the field and by using shorter-duration crops,” said R.
Ganeshamoorthy, CSISA Tamil Nadu hub manager. “Farmers can save about 40
percent of labor because renting a farm machine is cheaper than hiring manual
labor. The profit from the dry direct seeded rice is twice as much as that of
conventional rice cultivation. Overall, farmers can increase their yields by
7–10 percent depending on the rice variety.” **Making Arid Lands Cultivable **
Sivagangai and Ramanathapuram districts are two of the most arid areas in
Tamil Nadu. With almost 73 percent of the population depending on agriculture,
paddy is a staple crop grown only during the dry season (rabi), mainly under
rainfed conditions, with seeds broadcasted before the rains. The practice of
dry direct seeding of rice, which requires less water and labor, is helping
transform uncultivable lands (geographically about 50 percent of the area) to
productive agricultural areas in these districts. The Reliance Foundation and
CSISA have been working in partnership to convert dry tracts of lands from
traditional broadcasted rice to dry direct seeded using a seed drill. As a
result, 250 hectares in Sivagangai have already become cultivable and farmers’
groups have purchased 11 seed drills and are renting out the equipment to
other farmers. “Working together with several important organizations is key
to the success of the widespread dissemination of these technologies in Tamil
Nadu,” said Noel Magor, head of the Impact Acceleration Unit and Training
Center at IRRI. “In 2013, for example, the use of seed drill and land laser
leveling machines was endorsed by Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU)
while the Department of Agriculture (DoA) facilitated and provided some
subsidy to purchase the machines for outscaling to the farmers.” The Tamil
Nadu Rice Research Institute, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development, ITC Agribusiness division, Syngenta, MS Swaminathan Research
Foundation (MSSRF) and the Reliance Foundation are among several partners who
supported the research, capacity-building and extension work for large-scale
adoption of the technologies. **Less Fertilizers, More Profits** The Nutrient
Manager for Rice (NMR), an ICT-based decision tool that gives real-time site-
specific fertilizer recommendation, is helping farmers use less fertilizers as
compared with farmers’ current practice, thus increasing their profits by US$
67 per hectare on average. This tool, introduced by CSISA in the Cauvery
delta, provides fertilizer guidelines matching the field-specific needs and
conditions of a farmer, according to IRRI scientist P. Panneerselvam.
“Fertilizers are typically the second largest input cost in rice production,”
said Panneerselvam. “Thus, Nutrient Manager for Rice is a welcome technology
in Tamil Nadu.” NMR supports and complements the existing crop management
advisory services of the state government. Based on the information provided
by farmers about their fields, Nutrient Manager recommends the ideal amount of
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium to be added at critical growth stages,
while taking into account the amount of fertilizer the farmer prefers to use.
With the use of NMR, farmers can save 15-20 percent of nitrogen, 36-42 percent
of phosphorous and 28 percent of potassium compared with state fertilizer
recommendation; and 33-42 percent phosphorous and 30 percent potassium
compared with farmer’s practice. These were the results from an on-farm
participatory research done from 2013 to 2015 in Thanjavur, Thiruvarur, and
Nagapattinam districts in Tamil Nadu. “Tamil Nadu is a major rice producing
state in India with 1.9 million hectares under rice. The Cauvery delta
contributes a substantial share to the state’s rice production,” said
Panneerselvam. “Thus, helping farmers here will have an impact on the overall
production of the country.” **Sustaining Impacts** Partner organizations such
as TNAU and MSSRF have agreed to extend the research and development
initiatives under CSISA, beyond the project life- cycle. "TNAU will take up
the outscaling of key technologies under CSISA although the project has
already ended," said R. Rajendran, TNAU agronomist, who has been associated
with CSISA for the last seven years. "TNAU will continue by extending
technologies such as improved dry seeded rice cultivation, nonpuddled machine
rice transplanting and laser land leveling," Rajendran said. "Also, the
research initiatives conducted through CSISA will not stop. The research
outcomes will be taken continually to the farmers with the support from the
Government of Tamil Nadu and TNAU," he added. The Tamil Nadu Rice Research
Institute and the Soil and Water Management Research Institute will also
continue to expand the adoption of the water- and labor-saving technologies in
the Cauvery Delta and the entire rice-growing areas of Tamil Nadu. "MSSRF is
now extending the training to farmers after its staff members attended the
season-long training on dry direct seeded rice," said G. Sudhakar, scientist
at MSSRF. The season-long training was piloted by CSISA where participants
received hands-on training on all aspects of crop production and management —
from sowing to grain storage — during the entire growing season. _The original
version of this article appears in the __IRRI News Bulletin._ Continue Reading
# Production to Processing: Season-Long Training Started in Tamil Nadu Posted
on India-news, December 14, 2014 ![Season-long training](http://csisa.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2014/12 /Season-long-training-300x225.jpg)Mechanized
rice production, including mechanized drill seeding, has the potential to
improve yields and reduce labor demand in Tamil Nadu. Because mechanized rice
production involves a relatively knowledge-intensive set of practices,
extension agents involved in providing support and information must receive
proper training. Capacity building efforts for state extension agents are
often insufficient and existing training programs sometimes suffer from being
either too theoretical or narrowly focused on a small window of the cropping
cycle. To provide a comprehensive and hands-on training experience and to
build capacity within the state extension system, Tamil Nadu Agriculture
University (TNAU) and CSISA are piloting a season-long training course at the
Needamangalam Krishi Vigyan Kendra (farm science center) in Thiruvarur
District. The training will cover all aspects of growing drill-seeded rice
(DSR). Course materials have been fine-tuned and adapted to the specific
conditions of Tamil Nadu in a joint workshop by TNAU and CSISA staff. The
training program covers 13 major steps for successful rice production, from
crop planning to milling to processing. The course is composed of 10 training
days spread across the production cycle of rice and includes classroom
sessions as well as practical exercises and applications in the field. The
beginning of the curriculum includes an overview of rice ecosystems, rice
morphology and the cropping calendar, followed by a field-based introduction
to laser land leveling. Subsequent modules focus on land preparation, farm
power and tractor operation and maintenance and are followed by exercises on
crop planning, financial management and matching equipment to farm size.
Students will then prepare land for DSR. The next steps include practical
exercises on seed quality measurement, seed drill calibration and sowing. This
will be followed by lessons and exercises on weed and water management and
population maintenance. The emergence of the crop will be monitored, emerging
weeds identified and the post-emergency herbicide applied. The next training
day will focus on nutrient management of rice with an introduction to the
nutrient requirements and deficiency symptoms of rice, site-specific nutrient
management, Leaf Color Chart and Nutrient Manager. Additional lessons cover
insects, rodents and diseases in rice and their control, pesticide safety,
knapsack sprayer use, etc. Harvest day will see students taking yield
measurements, harvesting, threshing and drying rice. Practical exercises on
assessing grain quality will be done with the IRRI Rice Quality Assessment
Kit. The course will culminate on 29 January 2015 with an excursion to a
modern rice mill after lessons on rice storage, milling and processing as well
as a practical introduction to the ‘Superbag’ and ‘Cocoon’ as hermetic storage
systems. As a next step, CSISA also plans to introduce the season-long
training concept in Odisha with a focus on mechanical transplanting of rice.
Continue Reading ![](http://csisa.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/10
/CSISA-Logos- footer.png) Disclaimer and Terms of Use * * * * # CSISA Website
## Disclaimer While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this
website and its contents, Cereal Systems Initiative for South Asia (CSISA) and
its implementing partner organizations – CIMMYT, IFPRI, ILRI, IRRI and
WorldFish – assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. All information
and features described herein are subject to change without notice. This
website may contain links to third-party websites. CSISA is not responsible
for the contents of any linked site or any link contained in a linked site.
This website is providing these links only as a convenience, and the inclusion
of a link does not imply endorsement by CSISA of the linked sites or their
content. ## Terms of Use **Copyright © 2014 Cereal Systems Initiative for
South Asia** Cereal Systems Initiative for South Asia (CSISA) holds the
copyright to its publications and web pages but encourages use of these
materials for non- commercial purposes, unless specifically stated otherwise.
Proper citation is requested and prohibits modification of these materials.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is hereby granted without fee and without a formal
request provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on the
first page. For copyrights not owned by CSISA, express permission must be
pursued with the owner of the information. To republish or redistribute for
commercial purposes, prior permission is required. Copyright © 2015 CIMMYT

