Go to the U of M home page * One Stop * MyU: For Students, Faculty, and Staff
Search Search Radcliffe's IPM World Textbook * Welcome * IPM Defined *
Contributed Chapters * Instructions to Authors * Archived Files * Updates
&amp; Awards * Our Favorite Sites * Academic Programs in Entomology * Aphid
Alert Archive * 2003 * 2002 * 2001 * 2000 * 1999 * 1998 # Integrated Pest
Management In Indian Agriculture: A Developing Economy Perspective Vijesh V.
Krishna Department of Agricultural Economics University of Agricultural
Sciences, Bangalore, India N.G. Byju Department of Agricultural Entomology
University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore, India S. Tamizheniyan
Department of Agricultural Economics University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho
Regardless of political ideology, environmental issues are becoming paramount
in all economic systems from the very poor to the very rich. India, one of the
world’s largest agricultural economies, poses no exception. Demand for
chemical pest control and resulting negative externalities have expanded
greatly during the last four decades (Chand and Birthal 1997). Three decades
back, intensive and extensive cultivation of high yielding varieties of crops
were introduced in India to increase food grain production. The new crop
varieties and cropping sequences, especially monocropping, along with
injudicious and indiscriminate use of pesticides created many problems.
Several hitherto unimportant pest species began to cause economic losses.
Others, especially polyphagous insects, have precipitated national problems
(Srinivasa 1993). One glaring example is the old world bollworm, Helicoverpa
armigera (Noctuidae: Lepidoptera), which caused a 66 per cent reduction in the
yield of seed cotton in Andhra Pradesh State during the 1987-88 crop season.
Previously, this pest only seriously affected rabi crops such as chickpea and
was commonly known as the gram pod borer. Similar outbreaks have been reported
for other insects: Whitefly in 1984-85 and 1985-86 in South Indian states, and
tobacco caterpillar in 1977-78 and 1979-80 in the states of Tamil Nadu and
Gujarat (Arunakumara 1995) and more recently, coconut mite, Aceria guererronis
(Eriophyidae: Acarinae). The agrochemical industry in India now produces
47,020 metric tons of pesticide (Directorate of Plant Protection and
Quarantine 2002). Growth in pesticide consumption by Indian Agriculture is
shown in Figure 1. Although pesticide consumption in India is low (around 500
g per ha) compared to other countries like Japan (12 kg per ha) and Germany (3
kg per ha), problems in India resulting from unregulated use are quite
alarming.  The predominant classes of pesticides used in India (during
2000-01) were insecticides, accounting for 61 per cent of total consumption,
followed by fungicides (19 %) and herbicides (17 %) (Fig 2). In India, most
pesticide use is on cotton (45%), followed by rice (22%) (Fig. 3). ![graph
showing pesticide consumption in India from 1955 to
2001](//ipmworld.umn.edu/sites/ipmworld.umn.edu/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public/krishna_figure_1.gif?itok=bIOipC2i)
![pie chart showing the composition of pesticide use in
India](//ipmworld.umn.edu/sites/ipmworld.umn.edu/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public/krishna_figure_2.gif?itok=jNL_6Q4-)
![pie chart showing pesticide consumption rates by crop in
India](//ipmworld.umn.edu/sites/ipmworld.umn.edu/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public/krishna_figure_3.gif?itok=AvisqSgr)
In recent years, low external inputs and traditional techniques, including
non-chemical alternatives, have been increasingly urged for India. These are
viewed as technology options that could help create sustainable systems and
decrease or avoid the needs for expensive and undesirable chemical inputs.
Alternative agriculture has argued for an economically viable production to be
viewed in the context of a healthier, environmentally friendly and sustainable
chemical agriculture and the need for investment in low external input and
non-chemical alternatives that include farmer empowerment. Numerous models
exist and have been advocated and based on their respective inputs / nutrient
management principles. They may be broadly classified into: (a) Integrated
Pest Management (IPM), (b) Low External Input Sustainable Agriculture (LEISA),
and (c) Organic Agriculture. Many sustainable agriculture initiatives and
approaches based on these principles have now proved successful, with use of
pesticides varying from more to only a limited amount. Of these, IPM is the
one commonly advocated and widely adopted. ## Status of IPM in India India has
an agrarian economy, where the 1012.4 million population is dependent on
agricultural commodities from 124.07 million hectares cropped area cultivated
by 110.7 million producers (Prasad 2001). For rapid dissemination of IPM
information, IPM related activities are being implemented through 26 Central
Integrated Pest Management Centers (CIPMCs) located in 23 States and Union
Territories. Major activities under the IPM approach include undertaking
sample roving surveys for monitoring pest/disease situations on major crops,
production and release of bio-control agents and conducting Farmers’ Field
Schools (FFSs). Pest/disease situations are monitored regularly in the states
covering 644,000 hectares (ha) of the targeted area of 469,000 ha.  Pest
situation reports received from field stations and states were compiled and
comprehensive weekly and monthly reports circulated to the concerned officers
and scientists of State Departments of Agriculture/State Agricultural
Universities and ICAR Institutes to help them take appropriate remedial
measures. A total of 16,260 thousand bio-control agents have been mass
produced in the laboratories and released (up to December, 2002) against
insect pests in rice, cotton, sugarcane, pulses, vegetables and oilseeds
(against the targeted release of 11,570 thousands during the year 2002-03.
(40.54 % increase than expected)  An area of 523 thousands ha has been covered
against the targeted area of 367 thousands ha. in different states against
various insect pests through augmentation and conservation  (a 42.51 %
increase over expected) (http://agricoop.nic.in/plantprotec02.htm). During the
eight-year period from 1994-95 to 2001-02, the government of India spent
nearly Rs. 14,926 million for biocontrol of pests on different crops, covering
a land area of 4.3 million hectares.  In addition to this, Rs. 59 million was
spent for pest monitoring. The largest states of India, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka, rank highest in
accomplishing IPM.  A smaller state, Punjab has also done well in IPM (Table
1). The disparity between different components of IPM accomplishment should be
noted. ** Table 1. **Accomplishments of IPM in India (During 1994-95 to
2001-02) \--- ** Major States and All India** | ** Pest Monitoring (Million
Rupees)** | ** Biocontrol** | ** IPM Training &amp; Demonstration** ** Release
(Million Rupees)** | ** Area Coverage (Lakh ha)  ** | ** Number of FFSs** | **
AEOs Trained** | ** Farmers Trained** States | Punjab | 3.00 | 596.40 | 3.03 |
382 | 2 140 | 12 970 Madhya Pradesh | 3.62 | 1033.25 | 2.81 | 439 | 1 945 | 13
611 Karnataka | 2.69 | 1471.15 | 3.00 | 428 | 2 037 | 14 210 Andhra Pradesh |
5.40 | 1461.85 | 3.84 | 704 | 2 334 | 21 104 Uttar Pradesh | 7.49 | 1494.43 |
4.38 | 852 | 2 886 | 22 305 Maharashtra | 2.62 | 938.80 | 2.80 | 792 | 3 912 |
24 960 All India - Achievement | 58.89 | 14925.70 | 42.63 | 7 257 | 30 381 |
219 141 All India - Targets | 54.00 | 14000.00 | 38.50 | 7 620 | 37 560 | 224
960 Abbr: FFSs: Farmer's Field Schools.  AEOs: Agriculture Extension Officers.
Source: National Conference of Agriculture for Rabi Campaign 2002-03, Ministry
of Agriculture, Govt. of India. ![graph showing pesticide consumption and IPM
investment in different states in
India](//ipmworld.umn.edu/sites/ipmworld.umn.edu/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public/krishna_figure_4.gif?itok=HmWHxhYt)
It can be also seen that the states that are progressing with IPM, are also
ahead in using synthetic agrochemicals. Figure 4 indicates such a positive and
significant relationship between consumption of pesticides and investment in
IPM. This may indicate an increase in gross cropped area accounts for the
increased expenditure on IPM rather than the policy changes of selected
districts. Table 2 shows the major bio pesticides consumed in India - _
Bacillus thuringiensis_ (Bt) and neem-based insecticides.  India needs an
improved and newer group of bio pesticides. The exponential rate of increase
in bio pesticide consumption (together with reduced synthetic pesticide
consumption) is a positive sign that India’s agricultural community is
becoming more concerned about the negative consequences of agrochemical usage.
**Table 2. **Bio Pesticide Consumption in India [MT(Tech. Grade)] | \---|---
**Bio pesticide** | ** 1996-97** | ** 1997-98** | ** 1998-99** | **
1999-2000** | ** 2000-01** | _ Bacillus thuringiensis_ (Bt) | 33 | 41 | 71 |
135 | 132 | Neem based insecticides | 186 | 354 | 411 | 739 | 551 | Total |
219 | 395 | 482 | 874 | 683 | Source: Directorate of Plant Protection and
Quarantine, Faridabad ## Economics of IPM To date, successful IPM programs
have produced many benefits. These include (i) lower production costs (at farm
level), (ii) enormous savings for governments from reduced pesticide imports
and subsidies for pesticide use, (iii) reduced environmental pollution,
particularly improved soil and water quality, (iv) reduced farmer and consumer
risks from pesticide poisoning and related hazards, and (v) ecological
sustainability by conserving natural enemy species, biodiversity, and genetic
diversity. As mentioned earlier, the acceptability of a farming practice is
primarily determined by short-term profitability. IPM attempts to integrate
available pest control methods to achieve a farmer’s most effective,
economical, and sustainable combination for a particular local situation.
Studies have been carried out to examine the resource use pattern and
profitability of IPM vis-à-vis non-IPM farming practices. The results of a
recent study are presented in Table 3. A study of the costs and returns of IPM
and non-IPM farms in rice cultivation in the Thanjavur Delta of Tamil Nadu by
Tamizheniyan during 2001 showed that IPM farms were resource efficient and
more productive and profitable than non- IPM farms. **Table 3. **Costs and
Returns of IPM and Non-IPM farms in rice cultivation – Thanjavur Delta, Tamil
Nadu State (Rs./Acre) \--- **Particulars** | ** IPM (Rs.)** | ** Non-IPM
(Rs.)** | ** Pooled (Rs.)** Seed |           407.25 (4.06) | 434.70 (4.16) |
420.98 (4.11) Organic Manure | 999.50 (9.96) | 791.94 (7.58) | 895.72 (8.75)
Chemical Fertilizer | 1230.33 (12.26) | 1791.03 (17.14) | 1510.68 (14.75)
Plant Protection Chemicals | 230.75 (2.30) | 727.38 (6.96) | 479.07 (4.68)
Human Labour | 5633.17 (56.15) | 5386.73 (51.53) | 5509.94 (53.79) Animal /
Tractor Charge | 1266.87 (12.63) | 1114.38 (10.66) | 1190.63 (11.62) Other
Costs | 264.37 (2.64) | 205.60 (1.97) | 234.98 (2.29) Total Cost | 10032.24
(100.00) | 10451.76 (100.00) | 10242.00 (100.00) Gross Return | 16,213.17 |
14,900.93 | 15,557.05 Net Return | 6180.93 | 4449.17 | 5315.05 BC ratio | 1.62
| 1.43 | 1.53 Note: Figures in parentheses show percentages to total cost.
Source: Tamizheniyan, 2001. **The total cost per acre on IPM farms was Rs.
10,452 compared to Rs. 10,032 on non IPM farms. The gross return was Rs.
16,213 compared to Rs. 14,900.  The Benefit Cost Ratio was 1.62 for IPM,
compared to 1.43 for Non-IPM farms.** Similar results were obtained in another
study conducted on the economics of the IPM approach in Basmati rice (Garg
1999). The main aim of that study was to develop an IPM system in Basmati rice
that would make farmers aware of the ill effects of indiscriminate use of
pesticides and the benefits of IPM. Yield data showed that all IPM farmers
secured higher rice yields than those using conventional chemical control
tactics. It was also evident that farmer’s practice of not applying pesticide
or very little pesticide was better than the indiscriminate use of pesticide
which might have suppressed the natural enemy population. ## Farmers’
perception about hazardous effects of Pesticides Although IPM has been
accepted in principle as the most attractive option for protection of
agricultural crops from the ravages of insect and non-insect pests,
implementation at farm level in India had been rather limited (Puri 1998).
Production uncertainty is commonly believed to be an impediment to adoption of
less pesticide-intensive methods in agriculture such as IPM (Hurd 1994). To
understand the Indian farmer’s perception about hazardous effects of
pesticides, a survey was conducted among rice farmers following IPM and non-
IPM practices in the Thanjavur delta, a major rice production belt of
peninsular India (Tamizheniyan, 2001). The results are presented in Table 4.
**Table 4: **Farmers’ perception about hazardous effects of pesticides \---
**Categories ** | ** Farmers’ Perception** | **IPM farmers** | ** Non IPM
farmers** _ Pesticides are not highly hazardous to human health_ | No effect |
1 | 3 Very little effect | 5 | 10 Little effect | 5 | 15 _ Pesticides are
hazardous to human health_ | Much effect | 13 | 6 Very much effect | 11 | 4
High effect | 5 | 2 Total | 40 | 40 Source: Tamizheniyan 2001. It can be
observed that the IPM farmers were more likely to see pesticides as causing
hazardous effects to human health than were non-IPM farmers. One- sample c2
Test was employed (Appendix I) on these data and showed this observation to be
statistically significant at a 5 per cent level of significance. This
difference in attitude towards negative externality created by pesticide use
might be acting as an impediment towards adoption of pesticide saving farming
practices like IPM. ## Conclusion The increasing cost of plant protection and
accelerating  pest incidents make agriculture a risky and less profitable
enterprise. At the same time the toxic materials generated from chemical
farming pollute the environment and harm consumers’ and farmers’ health. A
more environmentally friendly and economical alternative for India would be
adoption of Integrated Pest Management. Additionally, from the viewpoint of
sustainability, attaining growth while maintaining the natural capital intact,
IPM is superior compared to conventional farming (Chopra 1993). It should,
therefore be appreciated and encouraged to a greater extent both by
governments and NGOs'. ## References * Arunakumara, V.K. 1995. _ Externalities
in the use of pesticides: An economic analysis in a Cole crop._ MSc Thesis
(Unpblished), UAS, Bangalore. * Chand, Ramesh and Birthal, P.S. 1997.
Pesticide use in Indian agriculture in relation to growth in area and
production and technological change. _Indian Journal of Agricultural
Economics, _**52**(3): 488-498. * Chopra, K. 1993.Sustainability of
agriculture. _Indian Journal of Agricultural Economics_, **48**(3): 527-537 *
Garg, D.K.1999. Development of an IPM approach in Basmati rice. _Annual
Report,_ NCIPM, p: 13-19. * Hurd, B.H. 1994. Yield response and production
risk: An analysis of integrated pest management in cotton. _ Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics_, **19** (2): 313-326. * Karanth, N.G.K.
2002. _ Challenges of Limiting Pesticide Residues in Fresh Vegetables: The
Indian Experience_. In E. Hanak, E. Boutrif, P. Fabre, and M. Pineiro,
(Scientific Editors), Food Safety Management in Developing Countries.
Proceedings of the International Workshop, CIRAD-FAO, pp.11-13, December 2000,
Montpellier, France. * Prasad, S.S.  2001. _ Country Report – India_. Report
prepared for the meeting of the Programme Advisory Committee (PAC), Ayutthaya,
Thailand, November 2001. * Puri, S.N.  1998. Present status of Integrated Pest
Management in India. Paper presented at Seminar on IPM, Asian Productivity
Organization at Thailand Productivity Institute, Bangkok. * Srinivasa,
D.K..1993. Environment and human health. _Environmental problems and prospects
in India_, Oxford and IBH Publications, New Delhi. * Tamizheniyan, S. 2001. _
Integrated __Pest Management in rice farming in Thiruvarur District of Tamil
Nadu: A Resource Economic analysis_. MSc Thesis (Unpublished), UAS, Bangalore.
**Appendix I: **atistical Significance of Farmer’s Perception towards
Hazardous effect of pesticides in rice farming \--- **   IPM Farmers** | **
Non-IPM Farmers** Null hypothesis, **H0**: Perception of farmers is not
different across all categories. Alternative Hypothesis, **H1**: Farmers think
pesticides as hazardous for human health. | Null hypothesis, **H0**:
Perception of farmers is not different across all categories. Alternative
Hypothesis, **H1**: Farmers think pesticides as not hazardous for human
health. Level of Significance, a = 0.05 | Level of Significance, a = 0.05
Degrees of Freedom, df = 5 | Degrees of Freedom = 5 c2 calculated = 14.9 | c2
calculated = 18.5 c2 table(a = 0.05, df = 5) = 11.07 | c2 table(a = 0.05, df =
5) = 11.07 Decision: Reject H0 | Decision: Reject H0 Conclusion: Farmers
general perception is that pesticides are hazardous to human health |
Conclusion: Farmers general perception is that pesticides are not hazardous to
human health Source: Computed from Table 4. ![College of Food, Agricultural
and Natural Resource
Sciences.](//ipmworld.umn.edu/sites/ipmworld.umn.edu/files/styles/panopoly_image_original/public
/CFANS-white.png?itok=JF6HoK1M) Department of Entomology | 219 Hodson Hall |
1980 Folwell Ave. | St. Paul, MN 55108 612-624-3636 | entodept@umn.edu ### For
Students, Faculty, and Staff * One Stop * MyU © 2016 Regents of the University
of Minnesota. All rights reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal
opportunity educator and employer. Privacy Statement Report Accessibility
Issue

