 * Skip to Main Content * Screen Reader Access * ![Decrease
Text](imagedefault/a_decrease.png) * ![Normal
Text](imagedefault/normal_icon.png) * ![Increase
Text](imagedefault/a_increase.png) * ![High
Contrast](imagedefault/highcontrast.png) * ![Normal
contrast](imagedefault/normal_icon.png) * ![Green
Theme](imagedefault/green.png) * ![Blue Theme](imagedefault/blue.png) *
![Brown Theme](imagedefault/brown.png) * हिंदी में ![Farmer Portal, Ministry
of Agriculture,Government of India](imagedefault/title.png) ![Farmer
Portal](imagedefault/beta.png) translate into : * Insurance * Storage * CWC *
Cold Stores * Grameen Bhandaran * Credit * Branch Locator * Debt Relief *
Short Term Credit * Med./Long Term Loans * Agricultural Banking * Agricultural
Credit * Crops * Wheat * General Info * Pest &amp; Diseases * Seed Varieties *
Maize * General Info * Pest &amp; Diseases * Seed Varieties * Rice * General
Info * Pest &amp; Diseases * Seed Varieties * Diagnostic Tool * Pulses *
General Info * Pest &amp; Diseases * Seed Varieties * Jute * General Info *
Pest &amp; Diseases * Seed Varieties * Sugarcane * General Info * Pest &amp;
Diseases * Seed Varieties * Other Crops * Pest &amp; Diseases * Extension
Activities * Demonstrations * Farmer Friend * Farm School * Beneficiary List *
NHM * NFSM * MSP * MSP Determination * Questionnaire * Kharif * Rabi *
Sugarcane * Copra * Jute * Palm Oil * Notified MSP * Current * Archives *
Animal Husbandry * Schemes * Guidelines * Report Disease * Login * Booklets
and Fliers * Agromet * AFMU * Met Center * Regional Center * IMD HQ * State *
Seed Dealer * Fertilizer/Pesticide Dealer * POP * Storage * MSP * Booklets and
Fliers * District * Seed Dealer * Fertilizer Dealer * Pesticide Dealer * Farm
Machinery * Manufacturer/Trader * New Registration * Registered *
Authentication Authority * Association &amp; FMTTI * State * Dealer * M &amp;
T Division * Seed Avalibility * NeGP-A * Feedback * Admin * Status * Home » *
Maize Pests And Diseases # Agriculture Corner * Home Page * About Us * Seeds *
Dealers * Availability * Central Varieties * Adaptable Varieties * Quality
Testing * Certification * Pesticide * Dealers * Crop Pest Database *
Precautions(Press Ad) * IPM * Best IPM Practices * State Wise Best Practices *
Producers Registration * Farm Machinery * Video Clips * Farmer Guide * Find A
Machine * Manufacturers * Dealers * Fertiliser * Dealers * Availability
Information * Soil Test Report * Soil Fertility Maps * Agromet Advisory *
English * Regional Language * Farmer Friendly Material * Booklets &amp; Flyers
* Handbooks * Success Stories * Video Films * Audio Clips * Market Price *
Other Agri Commodities * Minor Forest Produce * Exports & Imports * Agri
Export Zones * Benefit of Agri Export Zones * Drought Management * Economics
&amp; Statistics * Package of Practices * Programmes and Schemes ![Valid
CSS!](http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/images/vcss-blue) ![About
Us](imagedefault/farmerfriend1.jpg) # Maize Pests And Diseases Insect-pest
management Pink Borer (Sesamia inference) Sesamia inference occurs during
winter season particularly in peninsular India. The moth of the Sesamia is
nocturnal and lays eggs on lower leaf sheath. The larvae of the Sesamia enter
the plant near the base and cause damage to stem. \--- ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize3.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize4.png) | Control of Chilo and Sesamia: For
control of Chilo and Sesamia, foliar spray of 0.1 % Endosulfan {700 ml (35 EC)
in 250 litre water} 10 days after germination is very effective. The Chilo can
also be controlled by release of 8 Trichocards (Trichogramma chilonis) per
hectare at 10 days after germination. Intercropping of maize with suitable
varieties of cowpea is an eco-friendly option for reducing the incidence of
Chilo on maize. Shoot fly (Atherigona sp.) In South India it is a serious pest
but it also appears on spring and summer maize crop in North India. It attack
mainly at seedling stage of the crop. The tiny maggots creep down under the
leaf sheaths till they reach the base of the seedlings. After this they cut
the growing point or central shoot which results in to dead heart formation.
\--- **Control of Shootfly** Sowing must be completed before first week of
February so that the crop will escape shootfly infestation. Spring sowing must
be accompanied with seed treatment with Imidacloprid @ 6ml/kg seed. | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize5.png) Stem Borer (Chilo partellus) Major pest of
maize in India is Stalk borer. Chilo partellus, popularly known as stalk borer
that occurs during monsoon season is a major pest throughout the country.
Chilo lays eggs 10-25 days after germination on lower side of the leaves. The
larva of the Chilo enters in the whorl and cause damage in the leaves | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize1.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize2.png) \---|---|--- Termites (Odontotermes
obesus) ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize6.png). | Termite is also an
important pest in many areas. For control of termite fepronil granules should
be applied @ 20 kg ha-1 followed by light irrigation. If the termite incidence
is in patches, than spot application of fepronil @ 2-3 granuled/plant should
be done. Clean cultivation delays termite attack. \---|--- Other emerging
pests Recently some other non-traditional pests are also causing damage to
maize crop viz. larvae of American Bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera) which
causes damage to cob in Southern part of India while the Chaffer beetle
(Chiloloba acuta) feeds on maize pollen which adversely affects pollination in
northern part of India. | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize7.png)
**American bollworm** | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize8.png) **Chaffer
beetle** \---|---|--- Disease Management Across the country several diseases
occurs during different seasons, if they are not managed at proper time than
they leads to yield loss. BLSB, Pythium stalk rot, Bacterial stalk rot, PFSRs,
Polysora rust and Downy mildews are the major constraints to be tackled for
realizing genetic potential yield of the crop. Estimated losses due to major
diseases of maize in India is about 13.2% of which foliar diseases (5 %),
stalk rots, root rots, ear rots (5 %) cause major yield losses. The major
diseases and their management practices are described as below: Turcicum leaf
blight (Exserohilum turcicum) The disease is prevalent in cooler condition
with high humidity of Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West
Bengal, Meghalaya, Tripura, Assam, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujrat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu. Long, elliptical, grayish green or tan lesions (2.5-15 cm) appear
on lower leaves progressing upward. Grow PEMH-5, Vivek 21, Vivek 23, Vivek 25,
Pratap Kanchan 2, Nithyashree in the recommended areas followed by need based
sprays of mancozeb @ 2.5 g/litre (with adjuant @ 0.05%) at 8-10 days interval.
\--- ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize9.png) ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize10.png) ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize11.png) Turcicum leaf blight (Exserohilum
turcicum) It is a major disease in the states of Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujrat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu having warm humid temperate to tropical climate in the cropping
period. Lesions on the leaves elongated between the veins, tan with buff to
brown or dark reddish brown borders. Lesion size may vary in inbreds and
hybrids due to different genetic backgrounds. Growing of HM 10, PAU 352,
Malviya Hybrid Makka 2, EMH 1, HQPM 7, HQPM 5, HQPM 1, Shaktiman 3, Shaktiman
4, PEMH– 5, HQPM-4, and HSC-1 with need based sprays of mancozeb or zineb @
2.5g/litre of water. | ![Pest Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize12.png) | ![Pest
Maize](imagedefault/pestmaize13.png) \---|---|--- Common rust (Puccinia
sorghi) This rust attacks in the maize growing areas with subtropical
temperate and high land environment of Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh,
Sikkim, Meghalaya, West Bengal, Punjab (Rabi), Haryana (Rabi), Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar (Rabi), Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. It appears at the time of tasseling. The circular to
elongate, golden brown to cinnamon brown pustules are visible over both leaf
surfaces changing to brownish black at plant maturity. Adopt promising
hybrids/ varieties viz.; Buland, Sheetal, HHM 1, HHM 2 and HQPM 1,
Nithyashree. Spray of mancozeb@ 2.5g/litre of water at first appearance of
pustules. Prefer early maturing varieties. * Home * About Us * Help * Weather
Forecast * Feedback * RTI * Sitemap * Accessibility Statement * Website Policy
This website belongs to Department of Agriculture &amp; Cooperation, Ministry
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 17 August, 2015

