Indiatimes|**The Times of India**|The Economic Times : HI, __ * My Times *
LOGOUT Sign In ![The Times of India](/photo/48467971.cms)City More * Beauty
Pageants * Photos * Videos More * Fashion * Specials * Debate * Photos *
Videos * Platinum __ Times of India More * HomeHome * City * India * World *
Business * Tech * Cricket * Sports * Entertainment * TV * Life &amp; Style *
Travel * Blogs * Photos * Videos * Property * TIMES NEWS - RADIO * NRI *
Buy@Amazon.in ![](/photo/35958799.cms) * City * METRO CITIES * Mumbai * Delhi
* Bangalore * Hyderabad * Kolkata * Chennai * OTHER CITIES * Agartala * Agra *
Ahmedabad * Allahabad * Amritsar * Aurangabad * Bareilly * Bhopal *
Bhubaneswar * Chandigarh * Coimbatore * Cuttack * Dehradun * Erode * Faridabad
* Goa * Gurgaon * Guwahati * Hubli * Imphal * Indore * Jaipur * Jammu *
Jamshedpur * Jind * Kanpur * Kochi * Kolhapur * Kozhikode * Lucknow * Ludhiana
* Madurai * Mangalore * Meerut * Mysore * Nagpur * Nashik * Navi Mumbai *
Noida * Patna * Puducherry * Pune * Raipur * Rajahmundry * Rajkot * Ranchi *
Srinagar * Salem * Shillong * Shimla * Surat * Thane * Trichy *
Thiruvananthapuram * Vadodara * Varanasi * Visakhapatnam * Coimbatore * Crime
* Civic Issues * Politics * Schools &amp; Colleges * Events * ALL News Home »
City » Coimbatore * ![Soul Curry: When I dared to help a stranded
family](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Soul Curry: When I dared to help a stranded
family * How can you tell if your partner is lying to you * Fresh hairstyles
for 2016 * Reel life of Soumitra Chatterjee beyond Apu * Gorge on some til
laddoos * 'Celebrate differences, don't eliminate them' * Tips for cooking
Arabic food * 5 must have Indian organic foods * Russian girl recites Vajpayee
poem * 2016 Golden Globes:11 looks that mattered the most * ![Mercedes Benz
India launches GLE 450 AMG Coupe](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Mercedes Benz India
launches GLE 450 AMG Coupe * Cargo traffic at major ports increases by 13.45m
* Wal-Mart to shutter 269 stores, 154 of them in the * Jet Airways signs
loyalty pact with Bangkok Airways * 'Govt to come out with alternative
disinvestment * Rupee at fresh 28-month low vs dollar, down 30 * 'RBI's
deadline to clean up bad loans may hit banks * Sebi ups banks' exposure limit
to currency * Sensex plummets 318 pts to 19-mth low on global * 'Finance
ministry, RBI keeping close watch on * ![Indian-origin family firm eyes Tata
Steel Scottish plants](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Indian-origin family firm eyes
Tata Steel Scottish * India has largest diaspora population in world, UN *
Bobby Jindal demits office as Louisiana governor * NRI students offered
internships in 23 Indian firms * Indian-origin professor develops new method
to hunt * Nikki Haley seen as potential Republican * Ex-McKinsey partner, a
PIO, held for fraud * Uttar Pradesh to launch new policies, portal for * 'NRI
Diwas' to kickstart amid high security in Agra * Indian-origin businessman
honoured by UK's queen * ![Xi Jinping set to visit Saudi Arabia, Iran and
Egypt](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Xi Jinping set to visit Saudi Arabia, Iran and
* Russia says accusations of Putin's role in doping * 18 Turkish academics
detained for signing * Ban on Muslims' entry into US: Trump refuses to *
Indian-American gets $1m for selling record jackpot * Britain 'set to be
colder than the South Pole' * 12 Turkish academics detained for signing * 3
arrested on suspicion of links to Jakarta attack * German politician sends bus
full of refugees to * Michelle not running for presidency: Barack Obama *
![61st Britannia Filmfare Award: List of winners](/photo/34824568.cms) ###
61st Britannia Filmfare Award: List of winners * Have Ranbir Kapoor, Katrina
Kaif officially split? * Nominations: 61st Britannia Filmfare Awards *
Kangana: I was physically abused * Guran of 'Lagaan', actor Rajesh Vivek
passes away * Spoiler Alert: Wazir * Shahid Kapoor sends a gift to Malaika
Arora * Karisma married me for my money: Sunjay Kapur * PIC:Amitabh's grand-
daughter in a bikini * Rishi supports Kiku: Throws open challenge * ![Govt
working on new ethanol policy to boost prod](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Govt
working on new ethanol policy to boost prod * Should accept people of all
ideologies: RSS chief * Tripura CM gets second fake Facebook account * 'India
has given spiritualism, not communalism to * Sandeep Pandey files RTI seeking
reason for his * 'Cong manufactured issues to stall passage of GST * Bombay HC
reserves verdict in petition challenging * Young Kannada writer declines
Sahitya Academy * Mufti Mohammed Sayeed laid to rest * Rajnath Singh to visit
violence-hit Malda * ![Episode makes India look like 'tin pot republic':
Congress](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Episode makes India look like 'tin pot
republic': * Whole experience traumatic: Kiku * 'Lagaan' actor Rajesh Vivek
Upadhyay passes away * Ragpickers wish Mohit Malik * Bigg Boss Nau: What's
cooking between Priya and * Actors from Bhaage Re Mann celebrate Sankranti on
* Ali Asgar's tapori act * 80 per cent comedy can happen without hurting *
Kiku's arrest stalls film shoot, producer incurs * Imam Siddique paid almost
Rs 1 crore for Bigg Boss * ![7 key trends for Indian e-commerce industry in
2016](/photo/34824568.cms) ### 7 key trends for Indian e-commerce industry in
2016 * 5 Android games to play this weekend * 9 best smartphones unveiled at
CES 2016 * India had the most selfie-related deaths in 2015: * Viral photo:
This is not what you think it is * Watching porn in incognito mode may not be
entirely * Trai on call drops: Consumers have right to be * Xiaomi MiPad gets
a price cut in India * Bennett University, edX sign pact to provide online *
Infosys to work like a startup: CEO Vishal Sikka * ![Work dries up for Delhi's
oldest calligraphy artists](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Work dries up for Delhi's
oldest calligraphy * In panic, accused paid lawyer stolen cash for bail * Govt
plans bio-fuel buses in Delhi * For this Mumbai man, life has just begun at
100 * Delhi Police to procure full-body protectors * In Delhi, 'Eagles' on
watch against terrorists * 16,000 'enemy properties' worth crores in India, *
This ecofriendly mosque hopes to become a peace * Andhra Pradesh cock fights:
Punters rake in 100cr * 'Only two villagers developed blurred vision' * ![2nd
ODI: Another Rohit ton, another Indian defeat](/photo/34824568.cms) ### 2nd
ODI: Another Rohit ton, another Indian defeat * Mumbai beat Warriors to enter
PBL final, face Delhi * Sania-Hingis win WTA Sydney International title *
Struggling Dhoni shouldn't be singled out: Sunny * Yuki Bhambri gets tough
Australian Open draw * We need to score 330 or more, says MS Dhoni * Police
quiz Perera, Herath over match-fixing * Rewind: Narendra Hirwani's incredible
debut * Nehra: Wanted by India, ignored by Delhi * Australian Open: Serena,
Sharapova in same quarter * ![Parineeti @ Launch
event](/photo/34824568.cms)Parineeti @ Launch event * ![Lagaan actor Rajesh
Vivek dies](/photo/34824568.cms)Lagaan actor Rajesh Vivek dies * ![Rishi
Kapoor @ Musical evening](/photo/34824568.cms)Rishi Kapoor @ Musical evening *
![Lohri celebration](/photo/34824568.cms)Lohri celebration * ![Party at The
Frat House](/photo/34824568.cms)Party at The Frat House * ![Airlift:
Promotions](/photo/34824568.cms)Airlift: Promotions * ![Stay away government
if you want to help start-up India](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Stay away
government if you want to help start-up India * Six wins from Delhi's odd-even
experiment * India: A growing market for game development outsourcing * The
piles of Ayodhya * Odd-even a success: Now focus on the heavy lifting needed
to clean Delhi's air * Inclusive growth is the focus for Finolex * Delhi's
odd-even scheme: The ultimate analysis * How emotions affect decision making *
Looking in the mirror to cultivate mindfulness * ![Ganesh Chaturthi: Western
India's most vibrant festival](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Ganesh Chaturthi:
Western India's most vibrant * A culinary pilgrimage to Punjab * Free ways to
discover Delhi * The 5 best bars in Goa * 6 places to visit in and around
Jaisalmer * 48 hours in Alleppey * The best Gujarati restaurants in Ahmedabad
* Weekend getaways from Delhi for adventure lovers * 5 reasons why you should
visit Pushkar and Ajmer * ![Dhoni puts pressure on batsmen to bail team
out](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Dhoni puts pressure on batsmen to bail team out
* Rohit ton in vain as Australia punish sloppy India * Cricket and besides:
Clarke's return and DRS banter * Josh Hazlewood rested for last three ODIs v
India * Gulam Bodi under investigation for match-fixing * AB de Villiers's
comments signal fading charm of * AB de Villiers refuses to quash retirement
rumours * Hafeez, bowlers help Pakistan take 1-0 lead * Dhoni can win another
WT20 for India: Raina * ![Parineeti @ Launch
event](/photo/34824568.cms)Parineeti @ Launch event * ![Lagaan actor Rajesh
Vivek dies](/photo/34824568.cms)Lagaan actor Rajesh Vivek dies * ![Rishi
Kapoor @ Musical evening](/photo/34824568.cms)Rishi Kapoor @ Musical evening *
![Lohri celebration](/photo/34824568.cms)Lohri celebration * ![Party at The
Frat House](/photo/34824568.cms)Party at The Frat House * ![Airlift:
Promotions](/photo/34824568.cms)Airlift: Promotions * ![Govt working on new
ethanol policy to boost prod](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Govt working on new
ethanol policy to boost prod * Should accept people of all ideologies: RSS
chief * Tripura CM gets second fake Facebook account * 'India has given
spiritualism, not communalism to * Sandeep Pandey files RTI seeking reason for
his * 'Cong manufactured issues to stall passage of GST * Bombay HC reserves
verdict in petition challenging * Young Kannada writer declines Sahitya
Academy * Mufti Mohammed Sayeed laid to rest * Rajnath Singh to visit
violence-hit Malda * ![Episode makes India look like 'tin pot republic':
Congress](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Episode makes India look like 'tin pot
republic': * Whole experience traumatic: Kiku * 'Lagaan' actor Rajesh Vivek
Upadhyay passes away * Ragpickers wish Mohit Malik * Bigg Boss Nau: What's
cooking between Priya and * Actors from Bhaage Re Mann celebrate Sankranti on
* Ali Asgar's tapori act * 80 per cent comedy can happen without hurting *
Kiku's arrest stalls film shoot, producer incurs * Imam Siddique paid almost
Rs 1 crore for Bigg Boss * ![Ganesh Chaturthi: Western India's most vibrant
festival](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Ganesh Chaturthi: Western India's most
vibrant * A culinary pilgrimage to Punjab * Free ways to discover Delhi * The
5 best bars in Goa * 6 places to visit in and around Jaisalmer * 48 hours in
Alleppey * The best Gujarati restaurants in Ahmedabad * Weekend getaways from
Delhi for adventure lovers * 5 reasons why you should visit Pushkar and Ajmer
* Weekend Getaways | Travel Guides | HappyTrips app * ![Dhoni puts pressure on
batsmen to bail team out](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Dhoni puts pressure on
batsmen to bail team out * Rohit ton in vain as Australia punish sloppy India
* Cricket and besides: Clarke's return and DRS banter * Josh Hazlewood rested
for last three ODIs v India * Gulam Bodi under investigation for match-fixing
* AB de Villiers's comments signal fading charm of * AB de Villiers refuses to
quash retirement rumours * Hafeez, bowlers help Pakistan take 1-0 lead * Dhoni
can win another WT20 for India: Raina * South Africa vs England, 3rd Test -
Live Scores ### News * Times News - Radio![](/photo/50310116.cms) * Good News
* City * Smart Cities * India * World * Headlines * Speed News * Business *
Sunday Times * Specials * Startups * Good Governance ### Entertainment *
Entertainment * Movie Reviews * Photos * Mocktale * Music * Beauty Pageants *
Events ### Video * Videos * Live TV ### Life &amp; Style * Life &amp; Style *
Women * Travel * Zigwheels.com ### Spirituality * Spirituality * Astrology *
epooja ### Opinions * Opinion * Year Ender 2015 * Infographics * Cartoons *
Polls * Campaigns * Speak Out * TOI Editorials * ET Editorials ### TV * TV *
TV News * TV Listings ### Sports * Sports * Cricket * TOISA ### Technology *
Technology * Science * Gadget Reviews ### Education * Education Fest * Study
Abroad * Environment ### Services * Times Now * epaper * Real Estate *
Launchpad * Classifieds * NRI * Archives * Apps * Be Swatantra * ![2nd ODI:
Another Rohit ton, another Indian defeat](/photo/34824568.cms)2nd ODI: Another
Rohit ton, another Indian defeat__ * ![PMO sources say next CBI raid on Manish
Sisodia, Satinder Jain: Arvind Kejriwal tweets](/photo/34824568.cms)PMO
sources say next CBI raid on Manish Sisodia, Satinder Jain: Arvind Kejriwal
tweets__ * ![Certain that Sunanda Pushkar's death was not natural: BS
Bassi](/photo/34824568.cms)Certain that Sunanda Pushkar's death was not
natural: BS Bassi__ * ![Hindu Sena leader Vishnu Gupta arrested for
vandalising Pakistan airlines' Delhi office](/photo/34824568.cms)Hindu Sena
leader Vishnu Gupta arrested for vandalising Pakistan airlines' Delhi office__
* ![Suspected spy held from Ambala military area, probe
on](/photo/34824568.cms)Suspected spy held from Ambala military area, probe
on__ * ![Masood Azhar under 'protective custody':
Pak](/photo/34824568.cms)Masood Azhar under 'protective custody': Pak__ #
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University releases pest and disease forecast Adarsh
Jain The Tamil Nadu Agricultural University on Monday released a forecast to
help farmers to adopt preventive measures to save crops and prevent loss in
yield. | TNN | Oct 12, 2015, 09.43 PM IST COIMBATORE: With frequent showers in
the last two weeks, the risk of pest attacks and diseases in agricultural
crops has increased. The Tamil Nadu Agricultural University on Monday released
a forecast to help farmers to adopt preventive measures to save crops and
prevent loss in yield. The Centre for Plant Protection Studies, department of
entomology and department of plant pathology have together released a pest and
disease forecast for seven agricultural crops- paddy, cotton, tomato,
turmeric, sugarcane, groundnut and maize. Paddy: TNAU scientists have
identified leaf folder and stem borer diseases in the crops in Tirunelveli,
Salem, Kanyakumari, Theni, Thiruvarur, Villupuram, Dharmapuri, Madurai,
Thanjavur and Pudukottai. To save the crops from further attack, farmers are
advised to spray neem seed kernel extract 5% along with sticking agent 1
ml/lit. Farmers can also set up light traps (one/acre) to monitor the pest
population. If needed, farmers can spray one of the following insecticides:
Phosphamidon 40SL 225 ml/acre or Profenofos 50EC 400 ml/acre. The experts have
also predicted the possibility of an outbreak of paddy blast. Hence, the
farmers are advised to spray hexaconazole (0.25%) twice a week. Besides,
foliar application of 0.2% Pseudomonas fluorescens at fortnightly interval is
recommended to increase the yield. Cotton: The centres of TNAU in Dharmapuri
and Madurai districts have identified sucking pests in the crop. The experts
suggest the farmers to setup yellow sticky traps (5/acre) to monitor the pest
population. On the other hand, to manage cotton bollworms, farmers can set up
pheromone trap (5/acre) depending on the type of bollworm. If needed, they can
spray indoxacarb 14.5 SC 200 ml/acre or triazophos 40 EC 800 ml/acre. Tomato:
It was noticed that the crops in Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur and Dindugul
districts were affected with tomato leaf blight. To avoid further attack, TNAU
scientists suggest to spray mancozeb (dissolve 2g in 1l water) twice a week.
Turmeric: Erode is a trade hub for turmeric, and crops in Erode, Coimbatore
and Tiruppur districts have been identified with turmeric leaf spot by the
TNAU scientists. To avoid loss in yield, which will in turn affect the market
prices, experts advised farmers to spray mancozeb (dissolve 2g in 1l water) or
propiconazole 0.2% twice a week. Sugarcane: In Salem, Sivaganga, Theni,
Thiruvannamalai, Pudukottai and Villupuram, borer pest complex were found
below the economic threshold level. However, TNAU scientists advise farmers to
release the egg parasitoid Trichogramma 2.5cc/ha to avoid further attack.
Groundnut: The crop grown in Erode, Salem, Sivagangai, Thiruvannamalai,
Villupuram, Pudukottai and Ramanathapuram has been found affected with leaf
miner. If the rainfall levels are not normal, scientists predict that the pest
may exceed the economic threshold level, thus affecting the yield. To avoid
consequences, farmers have been advised to spray neem seed kernel extract 5%
along with sticking agent 1ml/l. Besides leaf miner, scientists have also
spotted dry root rot in few crops. Farmers can spray 0.1% carbendazim in the
soil, scientists say. Maize: It has been found that crops in Coimbatore,
Tiruppur, Madurai, Pudukottai and Dharmapuri have been affected with stem
borer. Farmers are advised to monitor the adult moths by setting up light
traps and, if needed, spray neem seed kernel extract 5% along with sticking
agent 1ml/l. RELATED ## From around the web ## More from The Times of India
Recommended By Colombia __ ## From Around the Web ## More From The Times of
India Recommended By Colombia __ ## Comments ![](/photo/29251859.cms)
Characters Remaining: 3000 ### OR PROCEED WITHOUT REGISTRATION __Share on
Twitter ### SIGN IN WITH FacebookGoogleEmail Refrain from posting comments
that are obscene, defamatory or inflammatory, and do not indulge in personal
attacks, name calling or inciting hatred against any community. **Help us
delete comments** that do not follow these guidelines **by marking them
offensive**. Let's work together to keep the conversation civil. X Sort By:Up
VotedNewestOldestDiscussedDown Voted Be the first one to review. We have sent
you a verification email. To verify, just follow the link in the message
![](/photo/29439462.cms) ____ Follow / Like us at **@timesofindia** ## Most
Popular * ![](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Islamic State claims Jakarta attacks,
its first strike at Indonesia ##### Islamic State on Thursday officially
claimed responsibility for a gun and bomb assault in the centre of Jakarta
earlier in the day that killed seven people, five of whom were attackers. *
![](/photo/34824568.cms) ### US government triples work visa fees ##### *
![](/photo/34824568.cms) ### Did Obama's sting prompt Pakistan to detain Jaish
chief Masood Azhar? ##### * ![](/photo/34824568.cms)__**Chaos at Mayawati's
birthday celebrations in Moradabad** Chaos were reported at former Uttar
Pradesh chief minister Mayawati's birthday celebrations in Moradabad. *
![](/photo/34824568.cms)__**Madhya Pradesh: Muslim couple beaten up over beef
rumours** Bringing back horrific memories of the Dadri lynching incident, a
group of 'cow protection' vigilantes beat up a Muslim couple on a train in
Madhya Pradesh on the suspicion that they were carrying beef. ## From around
the Web * * * * ## More From The Times of India * * * Recommended By Colombia
__ ## Navbharat Times ## Featured Today In Travel * Weather in Coimbatore ##
From our Global Partners
![](http://timeslog.indiatimes.com/timeslog.dll/topcnt?CHUR=timesofindia.indiatimes.com&amp;nojs;=1)![](http://cmstrendslog.indiatimes.com/cmslog.dll
?cms-msid=49327578&amp;cms-sec0;=7503091&amp;cms-sec1;=-2128932452&amp;cms-;
sec2=-2128958273&amp;cmsurtype;=viewed) **Dandiya lights up the festive spirit
in Coimbatore** **Smart City expectations galore among public** **Sharjah
flight grounded after hit by bird while landing** **Corporation goes online
for Smart City suggestions** **Devoid of basic amenities, shelters are nothing
more than ad display stands** **Tenders for 50 new bus shelters called while
old ones remain neglected** **Aircraft design competition on Kalam's B'day**
**SI held in gang rape of minor placed under suspension** **After 110 days,
Yuvaraj finally gives up** * 1Tamil Nadu Agricultural University releases pest
and disease forecast * 2Dandiya lights up the festive spirit in Coimbatore *
3Smart City expectations galore among public * 4Sharjah flight grounded after
hit by bird while landing * 5Corporation goes online for Smart City
suggestions * 6Devoid of basic amenities, shelters are nothing more than ad
display stands * 7Tenders for 50 new bus shelters called while old ones remain
neglected * 8Aircraft design competition on Kalam's B'day * 9SI held in gang
rape of minor placed under suspension * 10After 110 days, Yuvaraj finally
gives up * About us * Privacy policy * Newsletter * Sitemap * Create Your Own
Ad * Advertise with us * Feedback * TOI Mobile * Terms of Use and Grievance
Redressal Policy * RSS * ePaper * Archives ##### Other Times Group news sites
The Economic Times | इकनॉमिक टाइम्स | ઈકોનોમિક ટાઈમ્સ | Pune Mirror |
Bangalore Mirror | Ahmedabad Mirror | ItsMyAscent | Education Times | Brand
Capital | Mumbai Mirror | Times Now | Indiatimes | नवभारत टाइम्स | महाराष्ट्र
टाइम्स | ವಿಜಯ ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ | Go Green | Lifehacker India | Gizmodo India | Eisamay
| IGN India | NavGujarat Samay ##### Living and entertainment Timescity |
iDiva | Entertainment | Zoom | Luxpresso | Gadget Reviews | Online Songs |
MensXP.com | Hotels | Travel Destinations | smartapp | Cricbuzz.com #####
Interest Network itimes ##### Hot on the Web World | Politics | Business |
Sports | Entertainment | New Cars | Real Estate ##### Services Book print ads
| Online shopping | Matrimonial | Astrology | Jobs | Tech Community | Property
| Buy car | Bikes in India | Deals | Free Classifieds | Send money to India |
Used Cars | Restaurants in Delhi | Movie Show Timings in Mumbai | Remit to
India | Buy Mobiles | Listen Songs | TimesMobile | Real Estate Developers |
Restaurant Deals in Delhi | Mobile Recharge | Compare Mobile Phones | New Year
Party Places in Delhi ##### Trending Topics Watch TV Shows | Photogallery |
You Tube | Delhi Travel Guide | Katrina Kaif Photos | Irctc | Projects in
Mumbai | Yoga | Watch Tamil Movies Online | Facebook | Sunny Leone Photos |
Hindi News ### FOLLOW US ON ## Top Trends * Oscars 2016 slammed for being 'too
white' again * Donald Trump: Barack Obama's Syrian refugee guest was a 'trojan
horse' * Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar under 'protective custody':
Pakistan minister Rana Sanaullah * WHO declares West Africa free of Ebola
epidemic * Renault plunges 23% over emission raid * Starbucks closing Jakarta
stores until further notice * 5 suspected attackers dead in Jakarta, area
being secured * Oil drop plucks loonie; rupiah slips after Jakarta blasts * 3
suicide bombers explode in Jakarta Starbucks: Witness Copyright (C) 2015
Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights:Times
Syndication Service
![](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N7176/ad/TOI_Test/TOI_Test_1x1;sz=1x1;ord=\\[timestamp\\]?)`

