| ![EconPapers](/logo_econpapers.gif) | | \---|---|---|--- ![Economics at your
fingertips](/logo2_econpapers.gif) | EconPapers Home About EconPapers Working
Papers Journal Articles Books and Chapters Software Components Authors JEL
codes New Economics Papers Advanced Search EconPapers FAQ Archive maintainers
FAQ Cookies at EconPapers Format for printing The RePEc blog The RePEc
plagiarism page | | | ![](/EPwait.gif) # Technical efficiency in paddy farms
of Tamil Nadu: an analysis based on farm size and ecological zone _Bedassa
Tadesse_ () and _S. Krishnamoorthy_ _Agricultural Economics of Agricultural
Economists_, 1997, vol. 16, issue 3 **Abstract:** Despite the wider
application of efficiency analysis in Indian agriculture, little has been done
on the investigation of intra and interecological variations, size differences
and their interactions. However, ecological issues have paramount implications
for the low-input sustainable agricultural production. Furthermore, due to the
various causes of efficiency, the age-old size-based debate on efficiency
differences is not yet resolved. The present study examines the level of
technical efficiency across ecological zones and farm size groups in paddy
farms of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The study showed that 90% of
the variation in output among paddy (IR-20) farms ' in the state is due to
differences in technical efficiency. Land, animal power and fertilisers have
significant influence on the level of paddy production. Varying from 0.59 to
0.97, the mean technical efficiency was found to be 0.83. The use of F-test in
two-way analysis of variance (ANOV A) and censored regression (Tobit model),
with dummies for ecological zones, farm size groups and their interactions,
has shown that, at mean level, the level of technical efficiency among paddy
farms of the state differs significantly across agro-ecological zones and size
groups as well. The study further indicated that small-sized paddy farms in
zone II and medium-sized paddy farms in zone III are represented by
ecologically size-biased production techniques; thus achieving higher
technical efficiency. © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. **Keywords:** Productivity
Analysis; Research and Development/Tech Change/Emerging Technologies (search
for similar items in EconPapers) **Date:** 1997 **References:** View
references in EconPapers View complete reference list from CitEc **Citations**
View citations in EconPapers (18) Track citations by RSS feed **Downloads:**
(external link) http://purl.umn.edu/174067 (application/pdf) **Related
works:** Journal Article: Technical efficiency in paddy farms of Tamil Nadu:
An analysis based on farm size and ecological zone (1997)
![Downloads](/downloads_econpapers.gif) This item may be available elsewhere
in EconPapers: Search for items with the same title. **Export reference:**
BibTeX RIS (EndNote, ProCite, RefMan) HTML/Text **Persistent link:**
http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:ags:iaaeaj:174067 Access Statistics for this
article Agricultural Economics of Agricultural Economists is currently edited
by August More articles in Agricultural Economics of Agricultural Economists
from International Association of Agricultural Economists Contact information
at EDIRC. Series data maintained by AgEcon Search (). | Share \---|---
![RePEc](/repec3.gif) This site is part of RePEc and all the data displayed
here is part of the RePEc data set. Is your work missing from RePEc? Here is
how to contribute. Questions or problems? Check the EconPapers FAQ or send
mail to . ![Örebro University](/oru.gif)EconPapers is hosted by the Örebro
University School of Business. Page updated 2016-06-14 | Handle:
RePEc:ags:iaaeaj:174067 | | | | |

